CHARACTERIZATION OF CHEMICAL HETEROGENEITY IN POLYMER SYSTEMS USING HYDROLYSIS AND TAPPING MODE ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPY by D . Raghavan and X . Gu Polymer Science Division Department of Chemistry Howard University Washington DC 20059 , USA and T . Nguyen and M . R . VanLandingham Building and Fire Research Laboratory National Institute of Standards and Technology Gaithersburg , MD 20899 - 8621 , USA Reprinted from the Journal of Polymer Science Part B : Polymer Physics , Vol . 39 , 1460 - 1470 , 2001 . NOTE : This paper is a contribution of the National Institute of Standards and Technology and is not subject to copyright . Characterization of Chemical Heterogeneity in Polymer Systems Using Hydrolysis and Tapping - Mode Atomic Force Microscopy D . RAGHAVAN , 1 X . GU , 1 T . NGUYEN , 2 M . VANLANDINGHAM 2 1 Polymer Science Division , Department of Chemistry , Howard University , 525 College Street , Northwest , Room 120 , Washington , DC 20059 2 Building Materials Division , Building and Fire Research Laboratory , National Institute of Standards and Technology , Gaithersburg , Maryland 20899 Received 2 November 2000 ; revised 28 March 2001 ; accepted 2 April 2001 Published online 00 Month 2001 ABSTRACT : Characterization of polymer coatings microstructure is critical to the fun - damental understanding of the corrosion of coated metals . An approach for mapping the chemical heterogeneity of a polymer system using chemical modiﬁcation and tapping - mode atomic force microscopy ( TMAFM ) is demonstrated . This approach is based on the selective degradation of one of the phases in a multiphase polymer blend system and the ability of TMAFM to provide nanoscale lateral information about the different phases in the polymer system . Films made of a 70 : 30 polyethyl acrylate / polystyrene ( PEA / PS ) blend were exposed to a hydrolytic acidic environment and analyzed using TMAFM . Pits were observed to form in the PEA / PS blend ﬁlms , and this degradation behavior was similar to that of the PEA material . Using these results , the domains in the 70 : 30 blend were identiﬁed as the PS - rich regions and the matrix as the PEA - rich region . This conclusion was conﬁrmed by Fourier transform infrared - attenuated total reﬂection analyses that revealed the hydrolysis of the PEA material . TMAFM phase imaging was also used to follow pit growth of the blend as a function of exposure time . The usefulness of the chemical modiﬁcation / AFM imaging approach in understanding the degradation process of a coating ﬁlm is discussed . © 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . J Polym Sci Part B : Polym Phys 39 : 1460 – 1470 , 2001 Keywords : atomic force microscopy ; coatings ; chemical modiﬁcation ; polymer heter - ogeneity ; degradation INTRODUCTION Organic coatings are widely used in buildings , bridges , aircrafts , automobiles , and electronic equipment both for functional and aesthetic pur - poses . Depending on the application , the speciﬁ - cations of the organic coatings can vary over a wide range . Generally , a coating system is com - posed of a top coat , a primer , and a surface pre - treatment . The role of a coating system is to pro - vide protection against chemicals , moisture , and UV light . Despite great improvements in coatings tech - nology , problems still exist in the long - term pro - tection of metals when exposed to aggressive en - vironments . 1 Corrosion of polymer coated metals has been observed to occur only in certain regions Certain commercial instruments and materials are identi - ﬁed in this article to adequately describe the experimental procedure . In no case does such identiﬁcation imply recom - mendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Stan - dards and Technology and Howard University , nor does it imply that the instruments or materials are necessarily the best available for the purpose . Correspondence to : D . Raghavan ( E - mail : draghavan @ howard . edu ) Journal of Polymer Science : Part B : Polymer Physics , Vol . 39 , 1460 – 1470 ( 2001 ) © 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . 1460 and not uniformly over the coated surface . The corroded regions are found to be directly beneath degradation - susceptible regions in the coating . 2 These degradation - susceptible regions are micro - scopic in dimension and have chemical , physical , and mechanical properties that are different from the rest of the ﬁlm . Although they occupy only a small fraction of the ﬁlm volume , they control the corrosion - protection performance of a polymer coating . 2 – 4 In recent years , research has been conducted to characterize the degradation - sus - ceptible regions in coatings , but they have been limited to indirect measurements such as micro - hardness , DC resistance , and AC impedance . 5 , 6 The exact nature of these regions and the degra - dation mechanism are unknown . However , the behavior of these regions has been observed to be similar to that of a hydrophilic membrane , that is , they have a high ionic conductivity and high wa - ter - uptake capacity . 3 During exposure to aggres - sive environments , these regions are believed to undergo degradation , leading to the formation of conductive pathways through the ﬁlm and allow - ing corrosive ions to reach the metal surface . 7 These regions are believed to consist of partially polymerized , low molecular weight , low - crosslinked materials and are not uniformly distributed in the polymer coating ﬁlm . 8 BACKGROUND Relating the microstructural features to the per - formance of coatings requires mapping and char - acterizing the degradation - susceptible regions , which have been the subject of much interest . For the mapping of heterogeneity in thin ﬁlms , poly - mer blends and copolymers have served as useful model systems . 9 , 10 In the past , analytical tech - niques such as small - angle X - ray scattering , X - ray photoelectron spectroscopy , neutron scatter - ing , and secondary ion – mass spectrometry have been widely used to provide valuable in - depth microstructural information of polymers . 11 – 12 However , these techniques provide limited capa - bility to both visually and qualitatively character - ize the surface morphology from the micron to the angstrom scale . Surface - morphology character - ization of thin polymer ﬁlm is essential because the surface properties inﬂuence the interactions that may occur between the ﬁlm and the external environment . For example , the lateral composi - tion on an exterior surface of a thin polymer ﬁlm mostly deﬁnes the wettability of the material . 13 Advances in a number of scanning probe mi - croscopy techniques have made obtaining nano - scale lateral information of surfaces possible for polymeric materials . 14 – 17 Although scanning tun - neling microscopy is effective for characterizing conducting materials , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) is suited for examining nonconducting ma - terials . AFM is a tool commonly used to image the topography of thin and thick ﬁlms of organic and inorganic materials and biological molecules at high resolution under ambient conditions . 18 – 20 Novel imaging modes such as tapping - mode atomic force microscopy ( TMAFM ) have been de - veloped to image surfaces of soft materials that are prone to tip - induced damages . 21 , 22 In TMAFM , the cantilever oscillates vertically near its resonance frequency so that the tip makes a brief contact with the sample during each oscilla - tion cycle . The level of tapping force used during imaging is related to the ratio of the set - point amplitude to the free - oscillation amplitude , here - after called the set - point ratio ( r sp ) . As the tip is brought into contact with the sample surface , changes occur in the probe oscillation including phase angle , amplitude , and frequency as a result of tip - sample interactions . A phase image is re - corded based on the changes in phase angle as a constant amplitude is maintained . Phase images for heterogeneous materials often reﬂect differ - ences in the adhesive and / or mechanical proper - ties of different phases or components . 22 – 24 How - ever , interpretation of complex phase - image data to obtain individual properties has yet to be achieved . 25 Force - mode AFM is a nonimaging mode in which the probe tip moves vertically with respect to the sample to measure the tip - sample interac - tion forces as a function of separation distance . The force curve obtained from the force mode has been used to provide localized information about adhesion , friction , and compliance of the sample . Careful use of this mode can be used to perform nanoscale indentation of polymers . Using a com - bination of force - mode and TMAFM , we have shown that it is possible to effectively map me - chanically heterogeneous regions in multicompo - nent polymer systems . 26 , 27 Although AFM techniques can provide nano - scale information of organic materials with re - gard to tip - sample adhesion and sample compli - ance , they provide only limited information , if any , about the chemical nature of different groups present at the surfaces . The development of chemical force microscopy ( CFM ) has opened new CHEMICAL HETEROGENEITY IN POLYMER SYSTEMS 1461 possibilities to map chemically heterogeneous surfaces on a truly molecular scale . 28 Several groups have modiﬁed the tips and / or the samples used in AFM studies to map the chemically het - erogeneous regions in a sample at the nanoscale level . 28 – 31 For this purpose , the AFM probe tips and sample substrates have been modiﬁed with a number of functional groups ( e . g . , O CH 3 , O NH 2 , and O COOH ) based on both siloxane and thiol model compounds . The former can react co - valently with the Si ( SiO 2 ) tips and Si ( SiO 2 ) samples , whereas the latter can react with a gold layer that is deposited on the tip and / or substrate . Wong et al . 32 , 33 recently reported a major im - provement in the lateral molecular imaging of surfaces when functionalized AFM probe tips were replaced by functionalized carbon nano - tubes . The CFM technique has been used to probe adhesion forces between chemical groups on the tip / nanotube and speciﬁc functional groups of the sample in organic and aqueous solvents . A mea - sure of these forces provides a general basis for mapping the distribution of groups on lithograph - ically patterned sample surfaces . 29 Because dif - ferent regions of the lithographically patterned samples have the same chain length and micro - structure , any measurement of force is attributed mainly to the chemical characteristics of the re - gion . These patterned samples are regarded as model surfaces for the study of surface structures because they have regularly packed long alkyl chains . 34 , 35 In general , organic material ( i . e . , polymers ) can have a very irregular packing of chains . In addition , polymers can have chain - length variations for the molecules present on the surface . The combination of chemical heterogene - ity , irregular packing of chains , and chain - length variations can all contribute to the difﬁculty in the mapping of polymeric surfaces by CFM . 36 , 37 A solvent - based method in combination with AFM was recently used to study chemically het - erogeneous polymer surfaces . 37 The solvent - based method is applicable for studies of phase - separated structures if the phases have different degrees of swelling in a particular solvent . Elbs et al . 37 exploited this solvent - based AFM character - ization method to investigate the characteristics of microdomains in triblock and diblock polymer systems . In the present study , an highly aggres - sive chemical medium has been chosen to effec - tively modify one component , keeping the other component unmodiﬁed . An inorganic acid has been chosen as the aggressive chemical medium to accelerate the hydrolysis of one of the compo - nents in a two - component polymer blend . The objectives of the current research are to identify heterogeneous regions in poly ( ethyl acry - late ) ( PEA ) / polystyrene ( PS ) blends using AFM and to study the progressive degradation of dif - ferent components in a blend at the nanoscale by AFM . The second objective would be useful in understanding the degradation modes of organic coatings exposed to aggressive environments . In this article , TMAFM experiments are combined with a hydrolysis experiment to study the heter - ogeneity in polymer blends before and after expo - sure to HCl vapor . AFM results are used along with results from Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy ( FTIR ) to assist in interpreting the different regions in the chemically heterogenous PEA / PS system . If proven successful , the AFM / chemical modi - ﬁcation approach would be useful for identifying different phases in chemically heterogeneous polymeric systems . Research in this area is still in its infancy . This approach is also helpful in pro - viding a better understanding of the degradation of coating materials . This information is essential for developing better protective coatings against corrosion of metals . EXPERIMENTAL Materials PEA with a weight - average molecular weight ( M w ) 5 119 , 300 and a glass - transition tempera - ture ( T g ) 5 2 30 °C and PS with M w 5 250 , 000 and T g 5 104 °C were acquired from the Aldrich Chemical Co . Blend 1 had mass fractions of both PEA and PS of 50 % ( hereafter designated as 50 : 50 ) ; Blend 2 had a mass fraction of PEA of 20 % and a mass fraction of PS of 80 % ( hereafter des - ignated 20 : 80 ) ; and Blend 3 had a mass fraction of PEA of 70 % and a mass fraction of PS of 30 % ( hereafter designated 70 : 30 ) . To prepare these blend samples , separate 2 % mass - fraction solu - tions of PS and PEA in toluene were mixed in appropriate amounts . The three blends were cast into thin ﬁlms by spin coating on silicon sub - strate , the details of which can be found else - where . 26 All of the cast ﬁlms were conditioned for 24 h at 24 °C 6 2 °C before analysis . Some of the conditioned samples were analyzed using AFM , whereas the remaining samples were exposed to acid vapors . 1462 RAGHAVAN ET AL . In addition to the blend samples , cast ﬁlms of PEA were prepared so that changes in the PEA - rich regions of the blend samples as a result of acid exposure could be compared to the changes in the pure PEA ﬁlm . The cast PEA ﬁlms were pre - pared using a mass fraction of 5 % of PEA in toluene and the same spin - casting procedure as used for the blend ﬁlms . For the FTIR study , the PEA ﬁlm was solution - cast on a CaF 2 substrate . Acid Hydrolysis The cast PEA and PEA / PS ﬁlms were exposed to 2 - M HCl acid vapor by placing them on the des - sicator’s grid , which was kept several centimeters above the acid solution level . The hydrolysis ex - periment was conducted at 24 6 2 °C for up to 500 h . At speciﬁed time intervals , samples were removed from the closed dessicator and charac - terized by AFM and FTIR . Care was taken to image the same region of the sample before and after exposure by AFM and FTIR . The samples that were withdrawn from the dessicator for AFM and FTIR analyses were placed back in the cham - ber for future analyses . For the current investi - gation , the exposure time was deﬁned as the time the sample was inside the HCl - containing dessi - cator . Atomic Force Microscopy TMAFM was used to characterize the polymer blend samples . All AFM images were recorded with a Dimension 3100 scanning probe micro - scope from Digital Instruments operated under ambient conditions ( 24 6 2 °C , 45 6 5 % relative humidity ) using microfabricated silicon cantile - ver probes . Manufacturer’s values for the probe - tip radius and probe - spring constant were in the ranges of 5 – 10 nm and 20 – 100 N / m , respectively . Topographic and phase images were obtained si - multaneously using a resonance frequency of ap - proximately 300 kHz for the probe oscillation , a scan rate of 1 Hz , and a free - oscillation ampli - tude , A 0 , of 60 6 5 nm . Typically , a set - point to free - amplitude ratio ( rsp ) of 0 . 50 : 0 . 75 was used in the experiments . Film thicknesses were determined by AFM technique . To this end , a section of the ﬁlm was removed with toluene to expose the bare silicon substrate , and the height of the remaining poly - mer ﬁlm was determined relative to the underly - ing substrate . The result reported was the aver - age of six measurements . Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy FTIR transmission spectra of the cast PEA ﬁlms on CaF 2 before and after exposures to HCl vapor were collected using a Nicolet 560 3 FTIR spec - trometer equipped with a mercury – cadmium – tel - luride detector . All spectra were acquired as 200 signal - averaged scans between 1200 and 3800 cm 2 1 at a resolution of 4 cm 2 1 . The peak heights of the carbonyl absorptions at 1732 and 1710 cm 2 1 were used to express the ester and acid peak intensities , respectively . Dry air was used as the purge gas . RESULTS Unexposed PEA : PS Blends In Figure 1 ( a ) , a two - dimensional topographic im - age ( left ) along with the corresponding phase im - age ( right ) are shown for a 70 : 30 blend ﬁlm ob - tained by AFM under ambient conditions ( rsp 5 0 . 70 ) . The magniﬁcation of these images is in - dicated by the scan dimension , which is 10 m m . The thickness of this ﬁlm was 150 6 20 nm , as measured by AFM . Both the phase and topo - graphic images reveal that phase separation has occurred ; the domains that appear as circular re - gions are of bright contrast with respect to the matrix . The domains are separated and have a typical size of 0 . 05 – 1 . 5 m m . The size , dispersity , shape , and spacing of the domains vary over the sample surface . The lateral sizes of the domains in a polymer blend have been found to be strongly Figure 1 . Tapping - mode AFM height image ( left ) and phase image ( right ) for the 70 : 30 PEA / PS blend after 24 h of ambient conditioning ( r sp 5 0 . 70 ) . Contrast variations are 200 nm from white to black for the height images and 60° from white to black for the phase image . CHEMICAL HETEROGENEITY IN POLYMER SYSTEMS 1463 inﬂuenced by the reduction in the mobility of polymer chains caused by solvent evaporation during spin coating . 38 Within the domains are much smaller features that are a few nanometers in lateral dimension . In the topographic image , these smaller features are not evident , possibly because any associated topographic changes are small relative to those of the large structures . The smaller features in the phase image tend to have darker phase contrast compared with their surroundings , and this phase contrast is similar to that of the matrix material . This is particularly apparent in higher resolution phase images ( not shown ) . Similar ob - servations have been made in other two - compo - nent blend systems . 23 , 26 , 27 During spin coating , solvent evaporates from the polymer ﬁlm , leaving behind two phases , one that is rich in polymer A and one that has a small amount of polymer A encapsulated in polymer B - rich material . As the solvent amount in the individual phase decreases as a result of solvent evaporation , the polymer diffusion coefﬁcients are reduced to the extent where transport of polymer A over large distances becomes increasingly difﬁcult . 38 Therefore , the regions of the major polymer component in a phase rich in the minor component are detected as nanodomains . Several studies have assigned the domain and the matrix based on the topographic image con - trast as a function of composition . 39 Using a sim - ilar approach , an attempt was made using the topographic results of 70 : 30 , 50 : 50 , and 20 : 80 blend ﬁlms to assign the bright and dark regions in the topographic image to PS or PEA in the blend . Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the AFM images [ topographic ( left ) and phase ( right ) ] of the 50 : 50 and 20 : 80 blend ﬁlms after 24 h of ambient con - ditioning , respectively ( AFM images of the 70 : 30 blend are given in Fig . 1 ) . The phase data in Figure 2 ( a ) shows an interesting ringlike struc - ture around the topographically depressed do - mains . A similar ringlike structure between the depressed and elevated regions was noticed for the PS / PB system , and this was attributed to the edge or shadow effect . The edge effect could be prominent in the phase image if there is a large height difference between the elevated and de - pressed region . For the 70 : 30 blend , all the do - mains are bright and protruding , whereas for the 50 : 50 and 20 : 80 blends all the domains are dark and depressed . This observation suggests that the topographic image contrast of the domain is not consistent for different sample compositions . Therefore , the identiﬁcation of protruded and de - pressed regions in Figures 1 , 2 , and 3 as being PS or PEA was not possible from these topographic images . Another common approach for identifying the composition of the domain and matrix in a phase - segregated system is based simply on changing the sample composition and comparing the areas occupied by the domain and matrix regions . 27 , 39 , 35 Using a similar procedure , computer image anal - ysis of 70 : 30 and 20 : 80 concentrations was per - formed to measure the area fraction of the domain regions for each of the blend samples . For these measurements , three 10 3 10 m m images of each ﬁlm were analyzed . For the 70 : 30 blend , the area Figure 2 . Tapping - mode AFM height image ( left ) and phase image ( right ) for the 50 : 50 PEA / PS blend after 24 h of ambient conditioning ( r sp 5 0 . 75 ) . Contrast variations are 150 nm from white to black for the height image and 90° from white to black for the phase image . Figure 3 . Tapping - mode AFM height image ( left ) and phase image ( right ) for the 20 : 80 PEA / PS blend after 24 h of ambient conditioning ( r sp 5 0 . 7 ) . Contrast vari - ations are 10 nm from white to black for the height image and 50° from white to black for the phase image . 1464 RAGHAVAN ET AL . occupied by the bright domains was approxi - mately 24 6 3 % of the scan area , whereas that for the 20 : 80 blend was approximately 19 6 7 % of the scan area . Although only a few small areas of each sample were analyzed , the area occupied by domains did not increase proportionately with an increasing PS content but slightly decreased . As the PS content in the blend is increased , phase inversion might occur such that PEA forms do - mains in the PS matrix . A similar observation has been made in another macromolecular system . 36 From these results , a positive identiﬁcation of the bright or dark regions in the phase image as PS or PEA regions in the blend based on composition variation was not possible . A third method for identifying different regions in a heterogeneous system is based on the use of force curve measurements . A force curve is a plot of the deﬂection of the free end of the AFM probe as a function of z - piezo motion as the probe ap - proaches , contacts , and withdraws from the sam - ple surface . The force curve can be used to provide information on the local elastic properties . Nu - merous studies have shown the usefulness of the force curve in distinguishing hard and soft re - gions in multiphase polymer systems . 21 , 23 , 26 , 27 , 39 In the present study , force curve measurements were made on the phase - separated regions to identify the domains as PS - rich or PEA - rich re - gions . We expected the force curve for the PEA region to have a larger hysteresis and deeper trough after unloading compared with that of the PS material because the T g values of PEA are much lower than that of PS . Such a behavior would be characteristic of compliant materials and is caused by greater tip penetration , which creates more local inelastic deformation of the sample and higher adhesion forces as a result of the increased tip - sample contact area . However , we noticed that force curve measurements on this system were not always reproducible , and the force curves of domain and matrix regions were difﬁcult to distinguish . Perhaps for the phase - separated regions , a thin layer of the PS resided above and / or below the PEA regions and similarly PEA may have resided above and / or below some PS regions . Also , as commented previously , small regions of PEA were observed in the PS domains . The presence of the matrix phase as tiny droplets within the domains during the late stages of phase separation has been previously observed for other blends . 40 In any case , inﬂuences of the glassy PS on the response of a rubbery PEA re - gion and of the rubbery PEA on the response of a glassy PS region might have occurred such that the force curves were not easily distinguishable . Also , the force curves may be inﬂuenced by the substrate underneath the thin polymer layer . Chemical Modification of PEA : PS Blend Because the assignment of the domain and ma - trix regions of a multiphase system by physical methods is not always possible , a method based on selective chemical modiﬁcation of one of the components in a two - component system was per - formed . For example , assignments of the domain and matrix have been made based on exposing diblock and triblock copolymer systems to organic solvents and studying the changes in the image contrast . 37 In our study , an attempt was made to assign the domain and matrix in the blends by exposing the ﬁlm to an aggressive chemical envi - ronment and examining the ﬁlm by AFM . Figure 4 ( a ) shows a three - dimensional topographic im - age of the 70 : 30 PEA / PS ﬁlm that has been ex - posed to HCl vapor for 3 h . The thickness of this ﬁlm was approximately 150 6 20 nm , as mea - sured by AFM . Changes in the form of pits oc - Figure 4 . ( a ) A three - dimensional representation of the topography image , ( b ) tapping - mode height images , and ( c ) line proﬁle for a 70 : 30 blend sample after 24 h of ambient conditioning and exposing the ﬁlm to HCl vapor for 3 h . Contrast variations are 200 nm from white to black for the height images . CHEMICAL HETEROGENEITY IN POLYMER SYSTEMS 1465 curred in isolated regions of the matrix , but the overall morphology , size , and shape of the do - mains were essentially unaltered . The dark re - gions in the three - dimensional image of Figure 4 ( a ) and the two - dimensional image of Figure 4 ( b ) represent pits that are formed within the hetero - geneous structure . A corresponding line proﬁle of the sample is shown in Figure 4 ( c ) , which pro - vides the depth and width of the dark region . To relate the changes resulting from acid expo - sure in the composition of the PEA / PS blend , PEA and PS cast ﬁlms were similarly exposed to HCl vapor . The changes observed in the matrix mate - rial of the blend were assumed to correspond to changes in either the PEA or PS regions of the ﬁlm with exposure to HCl vapor . Consequently , any change resulting from hydrolytic degradation should be noticeable in the AFM images of the PEA and PS ﬁlms . Although PS is essentially a hydrophobic poly - mer , it is necessary to determine the susceptibil - ity of PS to acid hydrolysis . To study the suscep - tibility of the PS ﬁlm to the same hydrolytic con - ditions as that for the blend , cast PS ﬁlm of thickness 200 nm was subject to acid hydrolysis . Little visible change was observed in the topo - graphic image contrast of the PS ﬁlm after 60 days of exposure : a roughness of 0 . 47 6 0 . 04 nm for the exposed and 0 . 45 6 0 . 01 nm for the unex - posed polystyrene ﬁlm . These results indicate that , under the conditions used in the hydrolysis experiment of the PEA / PS blend , the changes ob - served in the matrix material were due to the hydrolysis of the PEA regions in the blend and not from the PS domains . In Figure 5 ( a ) , the AFM topographic image ( left ) and phase image ( right ) are shown for a 20 - 3 20 - m m scan area of a 110 - 6 10 - nm thick PEA cast ﬁlm that has been exposed to the same acid environment for 40 days . In contrast to the gen - erally smooth surface of the unexposed PEA cast ﬁlm , the surface of the exposed PEA ﬁlm shows isolated degradation ( dark spots in topographic image ) . Much of the degradation occurs at certain sites in the form of pits with lateral dimensions from several nanometers to several micrometers , as observed in the three - dimensional topographic image shown in Figure 5 ( b ) . The observation of localized degradation at certain areas and not uniformly over the ﬁlm surface is in good agree - ment with a recently published chemilumines - cence observation that thermooxidation of polypropylene initiates at local active oxidizing centers , followed by the spreading of these cen - ters . 41 Similar observations have been reported for the hydrolysis of a polycarbonate system . 42 The model for this localized hydrolysis is based on the existence of water - sensitive domains that be - have differently from the bulk polymer struc - ture . 43 These domains can be polar molecules such as monomers , dimers , or catalysts that did not participate in polymerization . Although the domains are few in an unhydrolyzed polymer , they are believed to represent the initial sites of water sorption , hydrolysis , and degradation . As hydrolysis proceeds , the materials that border the cluster of polar molecules start to degrade through dissolution and / or hydrolysis . The en - hanced reactivity of localized domains is consis - tent with the observations of increases in the Figure 5 . ( a ) Tapping - mode AFM height image ( left ) and phase image ( right ) and ( b ) a three - dimensional of the topography for the PEA ﬁlm after 24 h of ambient condi - tioning and exposing the ﬁlm to HCl vapor for 40 days . Contrast variations are 200 nm from white to black for the height image and 90° from white to black for the phase image . 1466 RAGHAVAN ET AL . width and depth of the pits with exposure time and number of isolated pits in the hydrolyzed PEA ﬁlm . To verify that the PEA was indeed hydrolyzed during acid exposure , fresh PEA ﬁlm was sub - jected to the same acid hydrolysis and tempera - ture conditions ( as for the blend ) , and the compo - sition of the ﬁlm was studied by FTIR . In Figure 6 ( a ) , the FTIR transmission spectra of a spin - coated PEA ﬁlm on CaF 2 are shown for the region from 3800 to 1200 cm 2 1 as a function of exposure time to HCl vapor . A peak attributable to pure PEA is observed at 1732 cm 2 1 and is assigned to the ester C A O stretching . The difference spectra [ Fig . 6 ( b ) ] between the ﬁlm exposed to different times and the unexposed ﬁlm were used to mea - sure the ester group consumption and formation of the acid group for the entire 110 - 6 10 - nm ﬁlm thickness . Two bands that are attributable to the OH stretching ( 3400 cm 2 1 ) and acid C A O stretching ( 1710 cm 2 1 ) appear in the difference spectra . This indicates that acid and alcohol were formed on hydrolysis of the PS / PEA ﬁlm . From the difference spectra , the loss of the ester peak and the growth of acid and alcohol peaks in the PEA / PS ﬁlm with exposure time can be clearly noticed . Hydrolysis of PEA is catalyzed by the presence of HCl . Hydrolysis of the polyester ( e . g . , PEA ) ﬁlm results in the formation of alcohol and carboxylic acid - terminated polymer chains . To study the conversion of ester to acid , the disappearance of the 1732 - cm 2 1 ester C A O band and the forma - tion of the acid C A O band at 1710 cm 2 1 with time were monitored . Figure 7 depicts a decrease in the intensity of the ester band at 1732 cm 2 1 and an increase in the intensity of the acid band at 1710 cm 2 1 as a function of exposure time . The released carboxylic acid in the ﬁlm may enhance the hydrolysis , as reported by several workers . 43 During the initial phase of exposure , a small amount of swelling of the PEA regions in the PEA / PS blend was observed , as evaluated by the change in the topography in the AFM images ( data not shown ) . Although the timescales of ester conversion , as monitored by FTIR , and that of the morphological alteration of the PEA ﬁlm as studied by AFM are only qualitatively comparable , all information is consistent with the hydrolysis of PEA in the blend on exposure to HCl vapor and dissolution of the PEA component from the blend leading to the formation of pits . The underlying conclusion from these results is that the changes observed in the PEA ﬁlm correspond to the changes in the matrix material of the blend when both are exposed to HCl vapor . With the successful identiﬁcation of domains and matrix in the chemically heterogeneous poly - mer blend , the effect of exposure time on the degradation of the 70 : 30 blend was studied . To quantify the changes in the matrix material with exposure to HCl vapor , the width and diameter of the pit in the 20 - 3 20 - m m image ( see Fig . 4 ) are calculated using AFM analysis software . In Fig - ure 8 , the deepening and enlargement progres - sion of the pit are shown as a function of time of Figure 7 . The intensity changes of ester carbonyl at 1732 cm 2 1 and acid carbonyl at 1710 cm 2 1 of a cast PEA ﬁlm as a function of exposure to HCl vapor at 24 6 2 °C . Figure 6 . ( a ) Unprocessed and ( b ) difference FTIR transmission spectra in the 3800 – 1200 - cm 2 1 regions showing the effects of exposure of PEA ﬁlm to HCl vapor . CHEMICAL HETEROGENEITY IN POLYMER SYSTEMS 1467 exposure to HCl vapor . As described previously , the thickness of this ﬁlm was approximately 150 6 20 nm . The pit width increased rapidly reach - ing a value of 4 . 2 m m within the ﬁrst 20 h of exposure and then leveled off thereafter . The depth of these pits continued to increase up to 100 nm after 100 h of exposure . These results indicate that the pit not only grew laterally but also through the thickness of the ﬁlm . In fact , the pit has reached the bare silicon substrate within a very short exposure time , as evidenced in Figure 8 ( b ) , in which the entire 150 - nm ﬁlm has been removed . DISCUSSION Evidence from water - contact - angle measure - ments of the PS ( u 5 90° ) and PEA / PS blend ( u 5 90° ) ﬁlms suggest that the outermost surface of the PEA / PS blend facing the exterior environ - ment is probably rich of the lower surface - energy component ( PS ) . This behavior of the blend is in general agreement with reported ﬁndings that the higher surface - energy component is likely to be in contact with the hydrophilic SiO x substrate , whereas the lower surface - energy component is likely to cover the layer of ﬁlm facing the external environment . 23 , 35 , 44 The presence of the thin top - most layer is normally very difﬁcult to detect by AFM alone , unless experimentation is performed at very low tapping - force levels . 35 , 44 As previously indicated , PEA regions in the blend have de - graded under hydrolytic conditions of condensing humidity and HCl vapor . For PEA material in the blend to hydrolyze , HCl and water molecules must permeate and reach this material in the PEA / PS blend . Water and HCl can enter the sublayer PEA molecules in the blend either by the breakup of the thin exterior PS layer or by the diffusion through the exterior PS thin layer . For thin ﬁlms that are few nanometers thick , a dewetting pro - cess can occur far below the T g of bulk PS , that is , in a room - temperature environment . Numerous studies have reported such dewetting of the thin layer in a polymer blend when the exposure en - vironment is changed from air to water . 38 , 45 – 48 Similarly , in the present investigation , such dew - etting of the thin PS ﬁlm outer layer would leave the base layer polymer ( PEA ) exposed to the ex - ternal environment for possible hydrolysis or dis - solution to occur . 35 , 44 Another possibility is the transport of water and HCl vapor through defects in the topmost PS layer to the underlying PEA region . Flaws and defects have been reported in thin ﬁlms of PS specimens . 49 , 50 The exposure of the underlying PEA region to HCl vapor and con - densing humidity is the ﬁrst step leading to the pit / pathway formation in thin ﬁlm of PEA / PS blends . The results of Figure 8 ( b ) suggest that the depth of the pits formed in the blend has reached the ﬁlm - substrate interface . If the hydrolyzable regions are continuous through the ﬁlm thick - ness , simple or autocatalytic hydrolysis of the hy - drolyzable PEA is adequate to explain the results observed in Figure 8 ( b ) . On the other hand , if the PEA regions are noncontinuous in the PEA / PS blend , hydrolysis of underlying PEA may be hin - dered by the PS region that is present between the hydrolyzed PEA region and underlying unhy - drolyzed PEA regions . However , long - range at - tractive forces operating between the hydrolyzed PEA region and underlying PEA regions could cause the structural rearrangement of the PS re - gion so as to expose the underlying PEA regions to HCl vapor and condensing humidity for hydro - lysis . Such a structural rearrangement as a result of long - range forces has been postulated in sev - eral polar / nonpolar systems . 26 , 35 , 44 In this sce - nario , the pathways are formed through a combi - nation of structural rearrangement and hydroly - sis . In either case , this mechanism of pit formation in model - coating compounds would re - sult in the formation of pathways through the coatings to the underlying substrate . Although pit formation was observed in model - coating compounds , the nature of the degradable regions has not been positively identiﬁed . Work is Figure 8 . Changes in depth and width of a pit in a PEA / PS blend as a function of time exposure to HCl vapor at 24 6 2 °C . 1468 RAGHAVAN ET AL . underway to characterize these regions using AFM and chemically modiﬁed tips to provide chemical information with nanometer lateral res - olution . The direct chemical observation of path - way formation in coatings will help in the design of more durable coatings , which leads to an in - crease in the service life of polymer - coated struc - tures , such as buildings , bridges , aircrafts , and automobiles . CONCLUSIONS The following conclusions were drawn from the current work : 1 . The mapping of chemically heterogeneous regions in model blend ﬁlms was achieved by chemically modifying one component of the blend followed by AFM imaging . 2 . AFM imaging is a valuable tool for quanti - tative study of pit formation and pit growth in model - coating compounds . 3 . During the course of hydrolysis , pits were observed to form locally at the PEA regions of the blend . FTIR evidence suggests that this pit formation corresponds to the hy - drolysis of PEA in the blend . 4 . Pits were observed to reach the ﬁlm / sub - strate interface , creating pathways that could lead to corrosion of the substrate . These pathways could have occurred either by hydrolysis of the continuous PEA re - gions or by a combination of the hydrolysis of noncontinuous PEA regions and struc - tural rearrangement of PS regions . This work was supported by the Air Force Ofﬁce for Scientiﬁc Research under Grant No . F49620 - 98 - 1 - 0252 . REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . Funke , W . ; Leidheiser , H . ; Dickie , R . A . ; Dinger , H . ; Fisher , W . ; Haagen , H . ; Mosle , H . G . ; Oechsner , W . P . ; Ruf , J . ; Scantlebury , J . S . ; Svoboda , M . ; Sykes , J . M . J Coat Technol 1986 , 58 ( 741 ) , 79 . 2 . Mills , D . J . ; Mayne , J . E . O . In Corrosion Control by Organic Coatings ; Leidheiser , H . , Jr . , Ed . ; National Association of Corrosion Engineers : Houston , TX , 1981 ; p 12 . 3 . Prini - Fernandez , R . ; Corti , H . J Coat Technol 1977 , 49 ( 632 ) , 62 . 4 . Mayne , J . E . O . ; Mills , D . J . J Oil Color Chem Assoc 1975 , 58 , 155 . 5 . Wu , C . L . ; Zhou , X . J . ; Tan , Y . J . Progr Org Coat 1995 , 25 , 379 . 6 . Miskovic - Stankovic , V . B . ; Drazic , D . M . ; Teodor - ovic , M . J . Corros Sci 1995 , 37 , 241 . 7 . Nguyen , T . ; Hubbard , J . B . ; Pommersheim , J . M . J Coat Technol 1996 , 68 ( 855 ) , 45 . 8 . Corti , H . ; Fernandez - Prini , R . Progr Org Coat 1982 , 10 , 5 . 9 . Kerie , T . ; Klein , J . ; Binder , K . Phys Rev Lett 1996 , 77 , 1318 . 10 . Jones , R . A . L . ; Norton , L . J . ; Kramer , E . J . ; Bates , F . S . ; Wiltzius , P . Phys Rev Lett 1991 , 66 , 1326 . 11 . McEvoy , R . ; Krause , S . ; Wu , P . Polymer 1998 , 39 , 5223 . 12 . Hasegawa , H . ; Hashimoto , T . Polymer 1992 , 33 , 475 . 13 . Schonherr , H . ; Hruska , Z . ; Vancso , G . J . Macromol - ecules 1998 , 31 , 3679 . 14 . Sauer , B . B . ; McLean , R . S . ; Thomas , R . R . Lang - muir 1998 , 14 , 3045 . 15 . Magonov , S . N . ; Ellings , V . ; Whangbo , M . H . Surf Sci 1997 , 375 , L385 . 16 . Bierwagen , G . P . ; Twite , R . ; Chen , G . ; Tallman , D . E . Progr Org Coat 1997 , 32 , 25 . 17 . Raghavan , D . ; Egwim , K . J Appl Polym Sci 2000 , 78 , 2000 . 18 . Lieber , C . ; Liu , J . ; Sheehan , P . Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 1996 , 35 , 687 . 19 . Rabke , C . E . Adv Mater Process 1999 , 156 ( 5 ) , 32 . 20 . Akhremichev , B . B . ; Mohney , B . K . ; Marra , K . C . ; Chapman , T . M . ; Walker , G . C . Langmuir 1998 , 14 , 3976 . 21 . McLean , R . S . ; Sauer , B . B . Macromolecules 1997 , 30 , 8314 . 22 . VanLandingham , M . R . ; McKnight , S . H . ; Palmese , G . R . ; Elings , V . B . ; Huang , X . ; Bogetti , T . A . ; Eduljee , R . F . ; Gillespie , J . W . J Adhes 1997 , 64 , 31 . 23 . Bar , G . ; Thomann , Y . ; Whangbo , M . - H . Langmuir 1998 , 14 , 1219 . 24 . Schmitz , I . ; Schreiner , M . ; Friedbacher , G . ; Grass - erbauer , M . Appl Surf Sci 1997 , 115 , 190 . 25 . Raiteri , R . ; Butt , H . - J . ; Beyer , D . ; Jonas , S . J Chem Phys 1 , 1999 . 26 . Raghavan , D . ; Gu , X . ; Nguyen , T . ; VanLanding - ham , M . ; Karim , A . Macromolecules 2000 , 33 ( 7 ) , 2573 . 27 . Raghavan , D . ; VanLandingham , M . ; Gu , X . ; Nguyen , T . Langmuir , 2000 , 16 , 2454 . 28 . Frisbie , C . D . ; Rozsnyai , L . F . ; Noy , A . ; Wrighton , M . S . ; Lieber , C . M . Science 1994 , 265 , 2071 . 29 . Noy , A . ; Vezenov , D . V . ; Lieber , C . M . Annu Rev Mater Sci 1997 , 27 , 381 . 30 . Green , J . B . D . ; McDermott , M . T . ; Porter , M . D . ; Siperko , L . M . J . Phys Chem 1995 , 99 , 10960 . 31 . Sinniah , S . K . ; Steel , A . B . ; Miller , C . J . ; Reutt - Robey , J . E . J Am Chem Soc 1996 , 118 , 8925 . 32 . Wong , S . S . ; Woolley , A . T . ; Joselevich , E . ; Cheung , CHEMICAL HETEROGENEITY IN POLYMER SYSTEMS 1469 C . L . ; Lieber , C . M . J Am Chem Soc 1998 , 120 , 8557 . 33 . Wong , S . S . ; Joselevich , E . ; Woolley , A . T . ; Cheung , C . L . ; Lieber , C . M . Nature 1998 , 394 , 52 . 34 . Baines , C . D . ; Whitesides , G . M . Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 1989 , 28 , 506 . 35 . Tezuka , Y . ; Araki , A . Langmuir 1994 , 10 , 1865 . 36 . Finot , M . O . ; McDermott , M . T . J Am Chem Soc 1997 , 119 , 8564 . 37 . Elbs , H . ; Fukunaga , K . ; Stadler , R . ; Sauer , G . ; Mag - erie , R . ; Krausch , G . Macromolecules 1999 , 32 , 1204 . 38 . Walheim , S . ; Boltau , M . ; Mlynek , J . ; Krausch , G . ; Steiner , U . Macromolecules 1997 , 30 , 4995 . 39 . Bar , G . ; Thomann , Y . ; Brandsch , R . ; Cantow , H . J . ; Whangbo , M . H . Langmuir 1997 , 13 , 3807 . 40 . Siggin , E . D . Phys Rev A : At Mol Opt Phys 1979 , 20 , 595 . 41 . Celina , M . ; George , G . A . ; Billingham , N . C . In Polymer Durability , Degradation , Stabilization and Lifetime Prediction ; Clough , R . L . ; Billingham , N . C . ; Gillen , K . T . , Eds . ; American Chemical Soci - ety : Washington , DC , 1996 ; Vol . 249 , p 159 . 42 . Pryde , C . A . ; Hellman , M . Y . J Appl Polym Sci 1980 , 25 , 2573 . 43 . Rosen , B . J Polym Sci 1960 , 47 , 19 . 44 . Pientka , Z . ; Oike , H . ; Tezuka , Y . Langmuir 1999 , 15 , 3197 . 45 . Reiter , G . Macromolecules 1994 , 27 , 3046 . 46 . Brochard - Wyart , F . ; Debregeas , G . ; Fondecave , R . ; Martin , P . Macromolecules 1997 , 30 , 1211 . 47 . Qu , S . ; Clarke , C . ; Liu , Y . ; Rafailovich , M . H . ; Sokolov , J . ; Phelan , K . C . ; Krausch , G . Macromol - ecules 1997 , 30 , 3640 . 48 . Suzuki , S . ; Green , P . G . ; Bumgarner , R . E . ; Das - gupta , S . ; Goddard , W . A . III ; Blake , G . A . Science 1992 , 257 , 942 . 49 . Linossier , I . ; Gaillard , F . ; Romand , M . ; Feller , J . F . J Appl Polym Sci 1997 , 66 , 2464 . 50 . Linossier , I . ; Gaillard , F . ; Romand , M . ; Nguyen , T . J Adhes 1999 , 70 , 221 . 1470 RAGHAVAN ET AL .