Copyright  2004 by the Genetics Society of America DOI : 10 . 1534 / genetics . 104 . 029827 The Identities of sym - 2 , sym - 3 and sym - 4 , Three Genes That Are Synthetically Lethal With mec - 8 in Caenorhabditis elegans John Yochem , 1 Leslie R . Bell and Robert K . Herman Department of Genetics , Cell Biology , and Development , University of Minnesota , Minneapolis , Minnesota 55455 Manuscript received April 8 , 2004 Accepted for publication July 22 , 2004 ABSTRACT On the basis of synthetic lethality , ﬁve genes in Caenorhabditis elegans are known to be redundant with the mec - 8 gene , which encodes a protein that contains two copies of an RNA recognition motif ( RRM ) and affects alternative RNA splicing . The molecular identities of two of the redundant genes , sym - 1 and sym - 5 , were previouslyreported . Theremainingthreegeneshavenowbeencloned , andtheirsyntheticallylethalphenotypes with mec - 8 are described in more detail . Animals homozygous for mec - 8 and sym - 2 loss - of - function mutations die during late embryogenesis . The SYM - 2 predicted protein contains three RRMs ; we propose that SYM - 2 and MEC - 8 can substitute for each other in promoting the maturation of the transcripts of a vital gene . Animals homozygous for mutations in mec - 8 and in either sym - 3 or sym - 4 have the same striking defect : they arrest development just prior to or just after hatching with a pharynx that appears fully formed but is not properly attached to the body cuticle . sym - 3 encodes a protein of unknown function with orthologs in Drosophila and mammals . sym - 4 encodes a WD - repeat protein and may also have orthologs in Drosophila and mammals . We propose that SYM - 3 and SYM - 4 contribute to a common developmental pathway that is redundant with a MEC - 8 - dependent pathway . G ENETIC redundancy is one of the major chal - the basis of an absolute requirement for inheritance of the plasmid . lenges to a thorough understanding of eukaryotic Synthetic mutations have also been described in Caeno - genomes ( Thomas 1993 ; Cooke et al . 1997 ; Nowak et al . rhabditis elegans . One example involves doubly mutant her - 1997 ; Hartwell 2004 ) . Genetically tractable organisms maphrodites that have excess induction of the precursor provide a means of addressing this issue through the cells of the vulva , whereas each single mutant has a nor - isolation of mutations that confer synthetic phenotypes , mal vulva ( Ferguson and Horvitz 1989 ) . Another phenotypes that depend on mutations in at least two analysis of genetic redundancy in C . elegans began with different genes . One of the ﬁrst systematic approaches a serendipitous observation of synthetic lethality be - for the isolation of synthetically lethal mutations made tween a loss - of - function mutation in the mec - 8 gene and use of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Bender certain viable mutations in unc - 52 . Although there are and Pringle 1991 ) . A strain was constructed that had defects associated with loss - of - function mutations in a deletion of a gene that is not essential for viability . mec - 8 , which encodes a putative RNA splicing factor The strain also had a mitotically unstable plasmid con - ( Lundquist et al . 1996 ) , null alleles of the gene are taining a wild - type copy of the gene and an independent for the most part homozygous viable ( Lundquist and marker for assessing inheritance of the plasmid . Seg - Herman 1994 ) . The defects include a loss of mechano - regants that failed to inherit the plasmid were nonmu - sensation , for which the gene was named ( Chalﬁe and tant phenotypically , but when a mutation in another Sulston 1981 ) ; aberrant chemosensation ; a slight gene was induced that was synthetically lethal with the dumpiness in the body ; and a partially penetrant cold - mutation in the ﬁrst gene , inheritance of the plasmid sensitive embryonic lethality . Homozygotes for null al - became essential for viability because it complemented leles segregate (cid:1) 27 % dead embryos at 16 (cid:1) ( vs . 1 % at the ﬁrst mutation and thereby prevented the synthetic 25 (cid:1) ) , and the arrested embryos exhibit a Pat ( p aralyzed lethality . Doubly mutant lines were easily identiﬁed on a rrest at the t wofold stage of embryogenesis ) phenotype ( Lundquist and Herman 1994 ) . In contrast , complete lethality results when animals are homozygous for a Sequence data from this article have been deposited with the mec - 8 mutation and any of a set of viable mutations in EMBL / GenBank Data Libraries under accession nos . AY220985 , AY221634 , AY223545 , and AY372076 . unc - 52 ( Lundquist and Herman 1994 ) , which encodes 1 Corresponding author : Department of Genetics , Cell Biology , and a proteoglycan that resembles perlecan ( Rogalski et al . Development , University of Minnesota , Room 6 - 160 , Jackson Hall , 1993 ) . On the basis of severe alleles of the gene , unc - 52 321 Church St . SE , Minneapolis , MN 55455 . E - mail : jyochem @ cbs . umn . edu is essential for viability . Null alleles prevent proper for - Genetics 168 : 1293 – 1306 ( November 2004 ) 1294 J . Yochem , L . R . Bell and R . K . Herman mation of the myoﬁlament lattice and result in dead cause a dumpy shape ) . An involvement of mec - 8 in RNA splicing can also account for the synthetic lethality of embryos with the Pat phenotype ( Rogalski et al . 1993 ; Hresko et al . 1994 ; Williams and Waterston 1994 ) . mec - 8 with the sym genes , which can be interpreted as one of two modes of genetic redundancy . In one possi - The viable alleles of unc - 52 , on the other hand , are nonsense mutations in certain exons that undergo alter - bility , another gene can substitute for mec - 8 in the splic - ing of critical genes . The sym - 2 gene described here may native splicing that is dependent on the mec - 8 gene ( Lundquist et al . 1996 ; Spike et al . 2002 ) . The synthetic be such an example . In a second possibility , genes or genetic pathways that require mec - 8 are redundant with lethality between mec - 8 and one of the viable alleles of unc - 52 results from a decreased ability to skip an unc - genes or pathways that do not require mec - 8 . If the sec - ond possibility exists , as seems likely on the basis of the 52 exon that has the nonsense mutation ; most mRNAs have the mutant exon and are therefore nonfunctional . nature of the sym - 1 and sym - 5 gene products , which seem to not be involved in RNA splicing , one might expect Although the mec - 8 and unc - 52 genes are not function - ally redundant , the striking nature of the synthetic le - a variety of genes to be synthetically lethal with mec - 8 , as described here for sym - 3 and sym - 4 . These genes may thality of mec - 8 mutations with unc - 52 viable mutations motivated a search for other mutations that might be act together in a redundant pathway for attachment of the pharynx to the outer body . The search for mutations synthetically lethal with a mutation in mec - 8 , with the goal of uncovering truly redundant genes ( as well as synthetically lethal with mec - 8 therefore may have re - vealed an unknown pathway for a critical step during other genes that might behave like unc - 52 ) . The search was based on a segregation analysis similar to the plas - development . mid screen mentioned above for yeast ( Bender and Pringle 1991 ) . A minichromosome , or extrachromo - MATERIALS AND METHODS somal array , containing wild - type copies of the mec - 8 gene was used to rescue mutant copies of mec - 8 present Genes and alleles : General growth of C . elegans was as de - scribed ( Brenner 1974 ) . The wild - type strain was N2 var . on the chromosomes . The array also contained a segre - Bristol . The mec - 8 alleles u74 , u314 , and u456 , all of which gation marker , permitting assessment of potentially behave genetically as null alleles ( Lundquist and Herman doubly mutant lines that acquire the requirement that 1994 ) , were used ; they have been characterized at the molecu - the array be inherited for viability . Five sym ( sy nthetically lar level ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . In this article , mec - 8 without an allele designation refers to mec - 8 ( u74 ) . The isolation of sym - 2 lethal with m ec - 8 ) genes were discovered in this search ( mn617 ) II , sym - 3 ( mn618 ) X , and sym - 4 ( mn619 ) X has been de - ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . With the exception of sym - 5 , each scribed ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . The following additional mutations of the sym mutations lacks a discernible phenotype when were used : LGII— dpy - 10 ( e128 ) , rol - 6 ( e187 ) , unc - 4 ( e120 ) , unc - 52 mec - 8 is wild type , and with the exception of the com - ( e444 ) , mnDf67 , mnDf68 , mnC1 ; LGIII— ncl - 1 ( e1865 ) , unc - 36 bination of sym - 1 and sym - 5 , double - mutant combina - ( e251 ) ; LGX— lon - 2 ( e678 ) , unc - 6 ( e78 ) . Descriptions of the mark - ers , mutations , and rearrangements can be obtained from tions of the sym genes with each other do not confer WormBase ( http : / / www . wormbase . org ) . synthetic lethality or other obvious defects . Correlating the sym mutations with the physical map : The The molecular identities of sym - 1 and sym - 5 have been sym mutations had been previously assigned to chromosomal previously reported ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . Both encode regions by standard genetic mapping ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . For proteins with leucine - rich repeats , and a functional fu - the purpose of positional cloning , single - nucleotide polymor - phisms ( SNPs ) between the N2isolate and CB4856 , a Hawaiian sion of SYM - 1 with GFP is secreted from the apical sur - strain , were the basis of precise mapping with respect to the face of the hypodermis . The combination of sym - 1 and physical map ( Jakubowski and Kornfeld 1999 ; Wicks et al . mec - 8 results in dead embryos that have detached body 2001 ) . In the case of sym - 2 , Rol non - Unc and Unc non - Rol muscles . RNA interference ( RNAi ) of sym - 5 ( or sym - 1 ) recombinant progeny of rol - 6 sym - 2 unc - 4 / Ha hermaphrodites , in a mec - 8 mutant background also confers embryonic where Ha designates the homologous chromosome from CB4856 , were picked , homozygosed , and scored with respect lethality . For neither sym - 1 nor sym - 5 is the molecular to their possible synthetic lethality with mec - 8 . Similarly , Lon basis of the synthetic lethality with mec - 8 known , but it non - Unc recombinants were picked among the self - progeny is reasonable to assume that these genes function , albeit of lon - 2 sym - 3 unc - 6 / Ha hermaphrodites , and viable ( non - Sym ) redundantly , in the attachment of body muscle to the Unc - 3 recombinant self - progeny of mec - 8 ; sym - 4 unc - 3 / Ha her - cuticle . These genes are presumed to be either redun - maphrodites were identiﬁed . SNPs that affect restriction - enzyme sites were chosen on the basis of the website http : / / dant with a gene that requires mec - 8 for maturation of genome . wustl . edu / projects / celegans / index . php ? snp (cid:2) 1 and its transcript or part of a developmental or other path - were assayed on DNA prepared by the polymerase chain reac - way that is redundant with another pathway , one of tion ( PCR ) from single recombinant worms . whose genes requires mec - 8 for maturation of its tran - DNA micro - injections and mutational rescue : For assessing script . rescue of the sym mutations , strains having the general geno - type mec - 8 I ; ncl - 1 unc - 36 III ; sym ; mnEx52 [ mec - 8 ( (cid:3) ) ncl - 1 ( (cid:3) ) Because mec - 8 affects alternative RNA splicing of the unc - 36 ( (cid:3) ) ] were micro - injected ( Mello and Fire 1995 ) with unc - 52 gene , an explanation for the pleiotropy of mec - 8 DNA preparations of cosmid clones , provided by A . Coulson mutations is an involvement of mec - 8 in the splicing ( The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute , Hinxton , UK ) , that of transcripts from other genes , including genes that had been selected on the basis of the SNP mapping . Trans - function in mechanosensation , chemosensation , and genic worms were identiﬁed by co - injection of the plasmid pRF4 , which confers a dominant rolling behavior ( Mello et al . synthesis of the cuticle ( interference of which could 1295 sym - 2 , sym - 3 and sym - 4 1991 ) , or co - injection of pTG96 , which expresses SUR - 5 : : GFP in nuclei ( Yochem et al . 1998 ) . Rescue of the sym mutations was based on the ability of transgenic mothers to produce healthy , Unc - 36 progeny . In the absence of rescue , the only viable progeny are fully coordinated , because they must inherit the meiotically unstable array mnEx52 , which rescues both unc - 36 and mec - 8 , and therefore rescues the synthetic lethality be - tween mec - 8 and the sym mutation . Rescue of the synthetic lethality by a newly formed array that contains wild - type copies Figure 1 . —The synthetic lethality of mec - 8 and sym - 2 . ( A ) of a sym gene changes the pattern of segregation : inheritance Nomarski image of an embryo arrested at the twofold stage of mnEx52 is no longer needed for viability , and viable Unc - 36 that segregated from a strain having the genotype mec - 8 ( u74 ) ; progeny are observed . rol - 6 unc - 4 / sym - 2 . ( B ) Image of a developmentally arrested Once positive cosmid clones had been identiﬁed for sym - 3 embryothatsegregatedfroma mec - 8 ( u314 ) homozygotefollow - and sym - 4 , the Expand Long Template PCR System ( Roche ing injection of dsRNA derived from part of the ﬁrst and third Diagnostics ) was used to generate DNA for assessing individual exons and all of the second exon of the sym - 2 gene . Injection genes for rescue . Wild - type genomic DNA was used as tem - of mec - 8 ( u74 ) homozygotes with the same dsRNA produced plate , and the reaction conditions and the lengths of oligonu - the same effect . Bar , 25 (cid:4) m . cleotide primers were according to manufacturer’s recommen - dations . The genomic DNA sequence ( C . elegansSequencing Consortium 1998 ) , accessed via WormBase , was used to design directly . For sym - 2 , the 5 (cid:5) and 3 (cid:5) ends of the mRNA were primers . For sym - 3 , the ﬁnal primers used were LRB - 63 ( AAAAA deduced from RLM - RACE products , but the internal part was GAGTAGGCAAAGGGCGCAGAGTG ) and LRB - 64 ( GGCTCA determined from PCR products generated from the incom - AGTGTGACTCGAACTAAAGCTC ) and for sym - 4 , LRB - 79 ( TTG plete cDNA clones yk82b3 and yk479a2 , which were provided CTGATGCCGTCATTGACAAGTTCCG ) and LRB - 80 ( GCG by Y . Kohara ( National Institute of Genetics , Mishima , Japan ) . GAGACGAGAAGAACAAACTTCATCC ) . PCR products were Amino acid sequences were aligned and displayed by means micro - injected at (cid:1) 15 (cid:4) g / ml . of the PileUp and PrettyBox programs from the Wisconsin RNA manipulations : Total RNA was isolated from mixed - Package Version 10 . 3 , Accelrys ( GCG ) , San Diego . stage populations using TRIzol ( Invitrogen , San Diego ) . cDNA RT - PCR of sym - 3 ( mn618 ) : RNA was isolated from mixed - having the proper 5 (cid:5) and 3 (cid:5) ends was generated with the stage populations of wild - type worms or from sym - 3 homozy - FirstChoice RNA - ligase - mediated rapid ampliﬁcation of cDNA gotes as described above . cDNA was prepared using the RLM - ends ( RLM - RACE ) kit ( Ambion , Austin , TX ) . For analyzing RACE kit , and PCR products spanning the sixth intron were cDNA from each of the sym genes , PCR products were gener - generated using the cDNA as template . The 5 (cid:5) primer , LRB - ated using a gene - speciﬁc primer and a kit - speciﬁc primer for 137 , had the sequence AAGTCGACGAACCAGTTGTCGAAC the 3 (cid:5) or 5 (cid:5) end . and was derived from the 5 (cid:5) end of the sixth exon . The 3 (cid:5) For RNAi , PCRproducts representing coding regionswere gen - primer was the “outer primer” from the RLM kit [ the primer erated with pairs of primers that both contained the T7 promoter that represents the linker added to the poly ( A ) tail of the sequence , and double - stranded RNA ( dsRNA ) was allowed to cDNA ] . After analytical gel electrophoresis and puriﬁcation form during transcription of the PCR products with a T7 MEGA - with a QIAquick column , the mixtures of PCR products were script kit ( Ambion ; Kennerdell and Carthew 1998 ) . For sym - 2 each directly subjected to DNA sequencing en masse . ( ZK1067 . 6 ) , the primer sequences were LRB - 19 ( TAATAC GACTCACTATAGGGAATCGGCAAACGTCTCATC ) , which derives from the ﬁrst exon , and LRB - 20 ( TAATACGACTCAC RESULTS TATAGGCCGACTTCTTGATCTTCCAG ) , which derivesfrom the third exon and is upstream of the region encoding the The phenotype of the mec - 8 ; sym - 2 double mutant : A ﬁrst RNA recognition motif ( RRM ) . The primers for sym - 3 strain homozygous for sym - 2 lacks an obvious mutant ( C54H2 . 1 ) were LRB - 53 ( TAATACGACTCACTATAGGTTCAG phenotype , but a strain that is heterozygous for sym - 2 CAAAGCTCGTCTTCG ) and LRB - 54 ( TAATACGACTCACTAT AGGGTTCAGCCACATAAGACGTC ) , and for sym - 4 ( R03E1 . 1 ) , and homozygous for a loss - of - function mutation in mec - 8 LRB - 42 ( TAATACGACTCACTATAGGTACTGCGGATATTC produces progeny that arrest growth and development TCGACG ) and LRB - 43 ( TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGTTA at the twofold stage of embryogenesis ( Davies et al . GCGAATCCGATTGTCC ) . After puriﬁcation with a QIAquick 1999 ) . This stage of arrest has been closely studied , kit ( QIAGEN , Chatsworth , CA ) , dsRNA ranging from 250 to 500 (cid:4) g / ml was injected into both arms of the gonads of her - because mutations that affect the structure of body mus - maphrodites , whichwereperiodicallytransferredtonewplates cles or their attachment to the body cuticle confer an for several days to give discrete intervals of egg laying . arrest at this stage , usually with paralysis of the embryos , DNA sequence analysis : For detection of mutations , DNA which is termed the Pat phenotype ( Williams and representing all of the exons and the parts of introns immedi - Waterston 1994 ) . Because the mec - 8 ; sym - 2 double ately ﬂanking the exons was produced from homozygous sym mutants by PCR . After puriﬁcation with a QIAquick kit ( QIA - mutants exhibit twitching of body muscles , they have GEN ) , theDNA sequenceof thePCR productswas determined been described as having a mild Pat phenotype ( Davies directly on both strands by the Advanced Genetic Analysis et al . 1999 ) . An example of the synthetic lethality be - Center Facility at the University of Minnesota . DNA sequences tween sym - 2 and mec - 8 is shown in Figure 1A . The cause were compared with the genomic sequence of the wild - type of the twofold arrest is unknown . strain , obtained from GenBank , with the BLAST program ( Altschul et al . 1997 ) . Because the genomic sequence can RNA interference can be a potent method for deplet - contain errors , however infrequent , each mutation was veri - ing a gene product in C . elegans ( Fire et al . 1998 ) . It ﬁed by determining the corresponding DNA sequence from was therefore of interest to determine whether or not SP2141 , the parent strain of the sym mutations . sym - 2 ( RNAi ) would differentially affect a mec - 8 strain vs . For cDNA analyses , the DNA sequence of RLM - RACE prod - ucts or of reverse - transcribed PCR products was determined the wild - type strain . As indicated below , the sym - 2 gene 1296 J . Yochem , L . R . Bell and R . K . Herman encodes a protein containing copies of an RRM . To T23G7 obviated the need for mnEx52 , the extrachromo - minimize the chance of cross - interference , double - somal array that contains mec - 8 ( (cid:3) ) , indicating rescue of stranded RNA was derived from a region of unique DNA the sym - 2 mutation . Plasmid subclones representing the sequence outside of the region that encodes the copies various genes predicted for T23G7 , except for ZK1067 . 6 , of the RRM ( see below ) . Injection of N2 hermaphro - were individually tested for rescue without success . In dites had no discernible effect on viability , on gross contrast , co - injection—but not single injection—of two morphology , or on behavior of the progeny . In contrast , overlapping subclones , SP # jy405i and SP # jy406g , efﬁ - injection of mec - 8 ( u74 ) or mec - 8 ( u314 ) homozygotes pro - ciently rescued sym - 2 ( Figure 2 ) . Homologous recombi - duced striking embryonic lethality ( Figure 1B ) . During nation within the region of overlap should generate an the expected peak of inhibition , (cid:6) 95 % of the progeny intact ZK1067 . 6 gene , as seen for other genes such as died as embryos ; the remaining hatched but were mal - sur - 2 ( Singh and Han 1995 ) . Thus , ZK1067 . 6 is likely to formed and died in the ﬁrst larval stage . Thus , RNAi of be sym - 2 . sym - 2 can elicit synthetic lethality with mec - 8 . DNA sequence analysis of ZK1067 . 6 from a homozy - The terminal arrest of 80 % or more of the embryos gous sym - 2 strain revealed a single - nucleotide change from mec - 8 mothers treated with sym - 2 dsRNA resembled relative to the N2 DNA sequence deposited in GenBank . that of the mec - 8 ; sym - 2 double mutants that segregate DNA sequencing of the parental strain conﬁrmed that from sym - 2 heterozygotes in a mec - 8 mutant background the change is speciﬁc to the sym - 2 mutant isolate . The ( Figure 1 ) , indicating that a signiﬁcant maternal effect nucleotide change , which results in the change of a does not exist for sym - 2 . As an independent assessment tyrosine codon to an asparagine codon in the third exon of a maternal effect , the progeny of mothers of genotype of the reading frame , conﬁrms that ZK1067 . 6 is sym - 2 . mec - 8 ( u456 ) ; sym - 2 unc - 4 were examined ; the mothers were The product of sym - 2 contains three copies of an rare escapers from a mec - 8 ( u456 ) ; mnC1dpy - 10 unc - 52 / RRM : An analysis of the 5 (cid:5) and 3 (cid:5) ends of sym - 2 cDNA sym - 2 unc - 4 strain . [ Rare mec - 8 ; sym - 2 unc - 4 escapers were generated by the RLM - RACE method combined with also recovered from a mec - 8 ( u74 ) ; mnC1 dpy - 10 unc - 52 / an analysis of the internal parts of cDNA clones provided sym - 2 unc - 4 strain ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . ] Virtually all of by Y . Kohara demonstrated that the mRNA is not trans - the progeny of such mothers died at the same stage of spliced and is 2262 or 2269 nucleotides long , the vari - embryogenesis as was seen for the sym - 2 homozygotes ability arising from different 5 (cid:5) ends . The donor of the derived from sym - 2 heterozygotes in a mec - 8 mutant back - ﬁrst intron has the sequence GCAAGUUG , in contrast ground . A maternal effect therefore seems unlikely . to the much more common sequence GURAGUUU in The failure of mec - 8 ( (cid:3) ) ; sym - 2 animals to exhibit a C . elegans ( Blumenthal and Steward 1997 ) . The use mutant phenotype might be the consequence of the of the GC donor has recently been conﬁrmed by new sym - 2 mutation being a weak allele . To test this notion cDNA clones submitted to GenBank and WormBase by genetically , sym - 2 was placed over genetic deﬁciencies Y . Kohara . A GC donor is present in (cid:1) 0 . 6 % of the that delete the rol - 6 sym - 2 let - 23 region : sym - 2 / mnDf67 introns of C . elegans , and a small fraction of these are unc - 4 and sym - 2 / mnDf68 unc - 4 progeny of crosses be - involved in alternative RNA splicing ( Farrer et al . tween sym - 2 males and mnC1 dpy - 10 unc - 52 / mnDf unc - 4 2002 ) . sym - 2 appears to fall in the major class , because hermaphrodites were readily identiﬁed and exhibited the cDNA analysis provided no evidence for alternative wild - type viabilities and fertilities . We conclude that the splicing . Interestingly , sequence data in WormBase indi - sym - 2 mutation is probably not a weak allele that exhibits cate that the GC donor is conserved in the sym - 2 gene synergy with mec - 8 mutations . Although RNAi should of C . briggsae , but the exon structure of the gene has not be used to infer the null phenotype of a gene , not been rigorously determined for this organism . the effective ability of sym - 2 dsRNA to produce striking The sym - 2 gene can encode a primary translation synthetic lethality with mec - 8 mutations while not affect - product of 618 amino acids . It contains three copies of ing wild - type worms reinforces an interpretation of sym - 2 the RRM that is present twice in MEC - 8 ( Figure 2 ) . as redundant with mec - 8 for a vital function . Strengthen - mn617 is a T - to - A transversion , changing the 163rd co - ing the notion that it is a signiﬁcant mutation , mn617 don of the open reading frame from tyrosine to aspara - affects a tyrosine codon , described in more detail below , gine , 19 codons upstream of the region encoding the that is conserved in the predicted sym - 2 gene product ﬁrst RRM ( Figure 2B ) . In MEC - 8 , the two copies of the from another species , C . briggsae ( Figure 2B ) . RRM are separated by a region rich in alanines and Identiﬁcation of the sym - 2 gene : Genetic mapping glutamines ( Lundquist et al . 1996 ) . SYM - 2 , in contrast , placed sym - 2 to the left of the unc - 4 gene on LGII ( Davies lacks regions that are comparably rich in these amino et al . 1999 ) . To deﬁne its position in more detail and acids ( Figure 2C ) . SYM - 2 is most similar to mammalian to correlate it with the physical map , snip SNP mapping hnRNP F and H and to Drosophila Fusilli ( Figure 2C ) , was performed , which placed sym - 2 between a Dra I SNP each of which has three copies of the RRM ( Wakabay - on cosmid clone T24B8 and the let - 23 gene on cosmid ashi - Ito et al . 2001 ) . The resemblance with these pro - ZK1067 . Micro - injection of strain SP2249 [ mec - 8 I ; sym - 2 teins is conﬁned , however , to the RRM . In fact , outside II ; ncl - 1 unc - 36 III ; mnEx52 [ mec - 8 ( (cid:3) ) ncl - 1 ( (cid:3) ) unc - 36 ( (cid:3) ) ] ] with cosmid DNA from the interval revealed that clone of the copies of the RRM , there is no striking resem - 1297 sym - 2 , sym - 3 and sym - 4 Figure 2 . —The sym - 2 gene and its predicted product . ( A ) Two sub - clones of ZK1067 rescued when co - injected but not when individually in - jected , implicating ZK1067 . 6 as sym - 2 . The genomic positions of the eight exons of the gene , determined from cDNA sequences from 5 (cid:5) - RLM - RACE and from3 (cid:5) - RACE , areindicated rela - tive to the 5 (cid:5) and 3 (cid:5) ﬂanking genes , the terminal exons of which are shown at the extreme left and right . The position of the sym - 2 ( mn617 ) mu - tation , the regions encoding copies of the RRM motif , and the region used for deriving dsRNA are also indi - cated . The ability of subclones to res - cue the mec - 8 ; sym - 2 synthetic lethality is summarized below the schematic of the gene . A schematic of a GFP fusion ( SP # jy424b ) that rescued sym - 2 is also shown . ( B ) The amino acid sequence predicted for the transla - tion of sym - 2 . Thick lines over the se - quence delimit the three copies of the RNA recognition motif , and the amino acid change associated with mn617 is indicated . Shown beneath parts of the third and fourth lines of the C . elegans sequence is the pre - dicted amino acid sequence , based on data in WormBase , for the region of SYM - 2 from C . briggsae that ﬂanks the tyrosine affected by mn617 , indi - cating that the tyrosine is conserved in C . briggsae . Identical amino acids are underlined . ( C ) A schematic com - parison of SYM - 2 with the Drosophila hnRNP F - like protein Fusilli ( Waka - bayashi - Ito et al . 2001 ) and with MEC - 8 ( Lundquist et al . 1996 ) , which has a region rich in alanines and glutamines that is not present in SYM - 2 . The carboxyl - terminal third of Fusilli is also rich in these amino acids . blance of SYM - 2 with other protein species in GenBank , rested embryos and hatchlings have now been examined in more detail with Nomarski optics , revealing an ana - including C . elegans proteins . The phenotype of the mec - 8 ; sym - 3 double mutant : tomical defect : the anterior end of the pharynx , which appears to be of normal morphology , is not properly One - quarter of the progeny of a strain heterozygous for mec - 8 but homozygous for sym - 3 are doubly mutant and attached to the outer body cuticle , precluding the for - mation of a normal mouth ( Figure 3 , A – C ) . Unable to die either as late - stage embryos or as L1 larvae . The arrested L1 larvae have been described as having a char - eat , the hatchlings eventually arrest growth and develop - ment in the L1 stage . acteristic swelling of the anterior end , which has been termed a “bulbous nose” ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . The ar - There is a striking uniformity in the degree of poste - 1298 J . Yochem , L . R . Bell and R . K . Herman Figure 4 . —Abnormal morphology at the junction of the hypodermis and pharyngeal primordium in embryos . ( A ) A pronounced invagination ( arrow ) at the anterior end of a mec - 8 ; sym - 3 mutant embryo . The basement membrane of the pharyngeal primordium is evident ( arrowheads ) . ( B ) An ap - parently normal invagination ( arrow ) at the anterior end of a mec - 8 ( (cid:7) ) ; sym - 3 ( (cid:3) ) sibling of the embryo in A . The focal plane with the maximum invagination is shown . The dorsal part of the pharyngeal primordium can be seen ( arrowhead ) . ( C ) The invagination of a wild - type N2 embryo . ( D ) A mec - 8 ; sym - 3 embryo later in development exhibiting extreme abnor - mality at the anterior end . The buccal cavity ( arrowhead ) is Figure 3 . —The phenotype of sym - 3 or sym - 4 in combination grossly recessed from the anterior tip of the embryo ( arrow ) . with mec - 8 ( u74 ) or mec - 8 ( (cid:3) ) . ( A – D ) Nomarski images of sym - 3 A canal may exist between the anterior tip and the buccal homozygotes . ( E and F ) Nomarski images of sym - 4 homozy - cavity . In contrast , the anterior ends of normal embryos at gotes . In A – F , an arrow indicates the anterior end of the buccal this stage resemble those of the larvae shown in Figure 3 , D cavity of the pharynx . The walls of the cavity appear as parallel and F . Bar , 25 (cid:4) m . lines in these optical sections , which are longitudinal , because of strong refraction of light caused by cuticle that forms the wall of the cavity . ( A – C ) mec - 8 ; sym - 3 double mutants . ( A ) The and sometimes the indentation is displaced from the anterior end of the pharynx appears to be fully formed but is not properly connected to the anterior tip ( arrowhead ) of center relative to the longitudinal axis of the animal . A the animal . Overall , the morphology of the pharynx , which worm displaying both of these traits is shown in Figure is shownin its entirety , appears to benormal . ( B ) The “bulbous 3C . The homozygous sym - 3 mutation in a wild - type mec - 8 nose” ( indicated with a bracket ) associated with mec - 8 ; sym - 3 background , on the other hand , has been described as ( and mec - 8 ; sym - 4 ) double mutants is particularly apparent in conferring no discernible mutant phenotype ( Davies this animal . As in A , the pharynx is not properly attached to the body . ( C ) An example of a malformed , asymmetric ante - et al . 1999 ) . Indeed , the junction of the pharynx with rior end of the body , which is sometimes seen in the double the outer body appears to be completely normal on the mutant . The arrowhead indicates refraction caused by an accu - basis of Nomarski optics ( Figure 3D ) . mulation of material . The anterior end of the pharynx There are several possible explanations for the aber - ( arrow ) , which is in a different focal plane , is not properly rant morphology of the anterior end . The defect could attached to the body . ( D ) The wild - type phenotype of a sym - 3 homozygote in a mec - 8 ( (cid:3) ) background . Note the oriﬁce lie with the pharynx , with the hypodermal cells involved formed by the proper junction of the anterior end of the in the attachment of the pharynx , or with both . As a pharynx withthe bodycuticle . ( E ) Thefailure ofproper attach - ﬁrst step toward an understanding , the junction of the ment of the pharynx to the outer body in a mec - 8 ; sym - 4 double hypodermis and the pharyngeal primordium was exam - mutant . As in C , the anterior end of the body is asymmetric . ( F ) ined in sym - 3 ( (cid:7) ) and sym - 3 ( (cid:3) ) embryos that segregated The wild - type phenotype of a sym - 4 homozygote in a mec - 8 ( (cid:3) ) background . Bar ( pertains to A – F ) , 25 (cid:4) m . from a strain having the genotype mec - 8 ; ncl - 1 unc - 36 ; sym - 3 ; mnEx169 [ sym - 3 ( (cid:3) ) ; sur - 5 : : gfp ] . The embryos were distinguished by their inheritance of the extrachromo - rior displacement of the pharynx ; its anterior tip is al - somal array , which expresses SUR - 5 : : GFP in addition most always (cid:1) 10 (cid:4) m from the anterior tip of the animal . to sym - 3 ( (cid:3) ) . An abnormal invagination resembling a Indicating the possibility that a mouth has been formed keyhole is evident at the junction in array - minus em - or at least partly formed , the worms seem to have an bryos ( Figure 4A ) . An array - plus embryo , in contrast , has only a moderate invagination ( Figure 4B ) , which indentation of the anterior tip of the body cuticle ( Fig - ure 3 ) , and sometimes strings of refractile material ( not resembles the invagination seen in wild - type N2 embryos ( Figure 4C ) . The array - plus embryo in B , when exam - shown ) can be seen between the indentation and the anterior tip of the buccal cavity of the pharynx . Occa - ined 45 min later , had formed what appeared to be a normal junction with the body : the buccal cavity could sionally , the indentation itself has refractile material , 1299 sym - 2 , sym - 3 and sym - 4 Figure 5 . —Identiﬁcation of the sym - 3 gene ( C54H2 . 1 ) . ( A ) The ability of regions of the cos - mid C54H2 ( C . elegans Sequencing Consor - tium 1998 ) to rescue sym - 3 on the basis of micro - injection of long - range PCR products . ( B ) The relative positions of the exons for the two forms of the gene and the location of sym - 3 ( mn618 ) in sym - 3a are indicated . The exons used for deriva - tion of dsRNA are also indicated . ( C ) On the basis of DNA sequencing of RT - PCR products , the mn618 mutation of the splice acceptor of exon 7 results in the use of a cryptic acceptor and subse - quent truncation of the open reading frame . In - tron sequences are shown in lowercase . be seen at the extreme anterior tip of the embryo . An ncl - 1 ( (cid:3) ) unc - 36 ( (cid:3) ) ] , C54H2 , was shown to rescue fully the synthetic lethality . Injection of long - range PCR prod - array - minus embryo , on the other hand , has a pro - nounced defect later in embryogenesis : the buccal cavity ucts indicated that C54H2 . 1 is sym - 3 ( Figure 5A ) . An analysis of cDNA produced by the RLM - RACE is displaced posteriorly from the anterior end of the embryo , and a channel appears to connect the buccal method indicated that sym - 3 produces two mature tran - scripts . One is 562 nucleotides in length for a predicted cavity to the exterior of the body ( Figure 4D ) . It there - fore appears that the pharynx is connected to the outer protein product , termed SYM - 3B , of 158 amino acids ; the other has 1231 nucleotides for a product , SYM - 3A , body , which can account for the constant displacement of the pharynx from the anterior tip and for the re - of 305 amino acids . The mRNAs have identical 5 (cid:5) ends , which are trans - spliced to SL1 , but the shorter transcript fractile strings that can sometimes be seen between the buccal cavity and the anterior tip , but the connection results from alternative 3 (cid:5) end formation within the fourth intron of the gene relative to the larger mRNA is aberrant and perhaps becomes occluded , preventing feeding . One possibility is that the pharynx is abnor - ( Figure 5B ) . The shorter transcript , which is less abun - dant than the long form , is polyadenylated 12 nucleo - mally short and thereby compresses the anterior end of the animal , but it is not clear why this would produce tides downstream of a sequence AAUGAA , which is the second - most common sequence for polyadenylation in a bulbous nose rather than a more uniform compression of the anterior end . Although an aberrancy in the phar - C . elegans ( Blumenthal and Steward 1997 ) . DNA sequence analysis of a homozygous strain has ynx cannot yet be ruled out , the morphology of the mec - 8 ; sym - 3 embryos is perhaps more consistent with revealed that the sym - 3 mutation is a G - to - A transition of the ﬁnal base of the splice acceptor of the seventh an overgrowth of hypodermal tissue that disrupts the formation of a normal mouth . and ﬁnal exon of sym - 3a ( Figure 5 , B and C ) . The alter - ation of the nearly completely conserved G [ the consen - Identiﬁcation of the sym - 3 gene : Genetic mapping placed sym - 3 between dpy - 8 and unc - 6 on LGX ( Davies sus for splice acceptors in C . elegans is UUUUCAG ( Blu - menthal and Steward 1997 ) ] would be expected to et al . 1999 ) . Its position on the physical map has now been investigated by SNP mapping , which has placed have a striking effect on splicing of the primary tran - script of the longer species of mRNA . Indeed , an analysis the mutation between the cosmid clones W01C8 and F46G11 . When cosmid DNA from the interval was tested of RT - PCR products generated from a sym - 3 strain re - vealed a difference relative to the wild - type N2 strain . for rescue by micro - injection of SP2250 , a strain of geno - type mec - 8 I ; ncl - 1 unc - 36 III ; sym - 3 X ; mnEx52 [ mec - 8 ( (cid:3) ) Direct DNA sequencing of the PCR products provided 1300 J . Yochem , L . R . Bell and R . K . Herman Figure 6 . —The amino - terminal half but not the carboxyl - terminal half of SYM - 3A is similar to the amino - terminal parts of proteins of unknown function from other species . The amino acid sequences of proteins from Drosophila ( GenBank no . NM136259 ) , mosquito ( Anopheles gambiae ; GenBank XM - 318591 ) , and mouse ( GenBank NM 153560 ) are aligned . The proteins , which are shown in their entirety , are longer than SYM - 3A and resemble each other outside the region of similarity with SYM - 3A . The proteins least resemble each other in their middle parts , which correspond to the carboxyl - terminal half of SYM - 3A . The location and consequence of the mn618 mutation are indicated . The fourth row of the alignment includes the ﬁnal four amino acids predicted for SYM - 3B , which is otherwise identical with SYM - 3A up to this point . no evidence for use of the mutant splice site . Instead , would truncate the product by 58 amino acids relative to the longer form of sym - 3 . a cryptic site 11 bp downstream and having the sequence GAUGCAG is used as the splice acceptor ( Figure 5C ) ; The sym - 3 protein has orthologs in Drosophila and mammals : The sym - 3 gene products have an amino acid there was no evidence from the DNA sequencing trace for use of other splice acceptors in the region . The sequence relationship with proteins of unknown func - tion in insects and mammals . The resemblance encom - consequence of the cryptic splice is an introduction of three novel amino acids before a stop codon , which passes all of the short form , but the long form extends 1301 sym - 2 , sym - 3 and sym - 4 Figure 7 . —Identiﬁcation of the sym - 4 gene ( R03E1 . 1 ) . ( A ) The position of the genes for the rescuing cosmid R03E1 ( C . elegansSequencing Consortium 1998 ) and the ability of long - range PCR products to rescue sym - 4 . ( B ) A schematic of the exons of the gene and the location of the sym - 4 ( mn619 ) mutation . The region of the gene that encodes the seven WD repeats and the exons used for derivation of dsRNA are indicated . for 147 amino acids beyond the region of the resem - relative to the central axis is sometimes seen ( Figure 3E ) . In contrast , the junction of the pharynx and outer blance ( Figure 6 ) . The insect and mammalian proteins are longer than SYM - 3A , and they resemble each other body appears to be normal for the sym - 4 mutation when mec - 8 is wild type ( Figure 3F ) . The similarity of the im - in the region that extends beyond the end of SYM - 3A . They least resemble each other in their middle sections ; properly attached pharynx associated with the mec - 8 ; sym - 3 or mec - 8 ; sym - 4 double mutant strengthens the this region begins where SYM - 3A diverges in sequence from each of them and where SYM - 3B terminates . The notion that sym - 3 and sym - 4 are involved in a common function or pathway . carboxyl - terminal third of the insect or mammalian pro - tein does not have an amino acid resemblance to any Identiﬁcation of the sym - 4 gene : Linkage of sym - 4 to unc - 3 on the right arm of LGX has been previously predicted gene product in C . elegans ; i . e . , the insect or mammalian gene is not an obvious fusion of two distinct demonstrated ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . A correlation with a small region of the physical map has now been genes in C . elegans . The sym - 3 mutation , which lies carboxyl terminal to achieved by snip SNP mapping , placing the mutation between cosmids C33G3 and C11H1 . A clone , R03E1 , the region of resemblance with the orthologs , should truncate the long form of SYM - 3 by 58 amino acids . from the interval fully rescues sym - 4 . On the basis of micro - injection of long - range PCR products corre - The mutation , however , should not affect the shorter transcript . Injection of mec - 8 ( u314 ) animals or of the sponding to genes on the cosmid , sym - 4 is R03E1 . 1 ( Fig - ure 7A ) , a conclusion reinforced by DNA sequencing wild - type strain with dsRNA representing all of the sym - 3 exons ( Figure 5B ) caused a small percentage of the of sym - 4 ( mn619 ) , which is a T - to - A transversion , creating a missense mutation in the seventh exon ( Figure 7B ) . progeny of both strains to die as embryos but did not otherwise elicit a strong phenotype and therefore could The mn619 change is not in the parental strain SP2141 ; DNA sequencing of the region from this strain showed not be used to address the question of whether or not sym - 3 ( mn618 ) causes a loss of a nonessential function in a complete agreement with the N2 sequence submitted to GenBank by the C . elegans Sequencing Consor - a wild - type background or is a mutation that is speciﬁc for a mec - 8 mutant background . tium ( 1998 ) . [ A second allele of sym - 4 , mn620 , has been reported ( Davies et al . 1999 ) ; DNA sequencing has The phenotype of the mec - 8 ; sym - 4 double mutant : The mec - 8 ; sym - 4 double mutant resembles the mec - 8 ; shown that it has a change identical to that of mn619 , raising the likelihood that the mutants were not isolated sym - 3 double mutant in having a bulbous nose ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . As for sym - 3 , there is no overt phenotype independently of each other . ] The product of sym - 4 contains WD repeats : Analysis when mec - 8 is wild type . The double - mutant combination of sym - 3 and sym - 4 in a wild - type mec - 8 background also of cDNA by RLM - RACE has shown that the major form of the sym - 4 mRNA derives from 10 exons ( Figure 7B ) . is without a phenotype ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . Closer exam - ination of mec - 8 ; sym - 4 segregants has revealed L1 larvae The 5 (cid:5) ends of this mRNA fall into two general classes . Approximately one - half are SL1 trans - spliced 23 nucleo - and late - stage embryos with improperly attached pha - rynges as described above for sym - 3 ( Figure 3E ) . As for tides upstream of the presumed AUG start codon . The other class contains mRNAs that are not trans - spliced sym - 3 in the mec - 8 mutant background , there is a con - stant displacement of the anterior tip of the buccal cavity and have variable 5 (cid:5) ends . The 5 (cid:5) end of the major species is 64 nucleotides upstream of the AUG , with from the anterior tip of the animal , and an asymmetry in the indentation of the anterior tip of the animal other species having even longer 5 (cid:5) ends . There are 1302 J . Yochem , L . R . Bell and R . K . Herman Figure 8 . —A comparison of the carboxyl - terminal half of SYM - 4 with the carboxyl - terminal halves of WD - repeat proteins of unknown function from human ( GenBank accession no . NP - 061918 ) and from Drosophila melanogaster ( NP 651742 ) . The seven predicted WD repeats are designated . Note that strong resemblance extends over several adjacent copies of the WD motif and that the mn619 mutation affects a conserved amino acid in the region of strong resemblance . also minor , uncharacterized forms of the mRNA that tein , both of unknown function ( Figure 8 ) . The third and fourth repeats in particular are similar among the have 5 (cid:5) ends that start within exon 4 of the major form . Although sym - 4 has variation in the 5 (cid:5) ends of its mRNA , species , and a codon for leucine corresponding to the one altered by the sym - 4 mutation is present in these other there is no evidence for alternative splicing of the pri - mary transcript or for alternative 3 (cid:5) - end formation . species in the midst of this strong resemblance . Although the human and ﬂy proteins are similar to SYM - 4 both in The predicted product of the sym - 4 gene has 1043 amino acids and contains a region in the carboxyl por - size and in having their WD repeats conﬁned to their carboxyl - terminal halves , their amino - terminal portions tion that has seven tandem copies of the WD motif . The sym - 4 mutation changes a leucine to a glutamine in the have no sequence resemblance to SYM - 4 . In fact , the amino terminal half of SYM - 4 lacks amino acid sequence third WD repeat . Although genes encoding WD proteins are common in eukaryotes , a stretch of WD repeats in resemblance to other proteins in the databases , includ - ing C . elegans proteins . SYM - 4 has a striking resemblance to a stretch of tandem WD repeats in a human protein and a Drosophila pro - As for sym - 3 , injection of dsRNA derived from sym - 4 1303 sym - 2 , sym - 3 and sym - 4 failed to elicit a phenotype in wild - type worms or in The classic category of genetic redundancy is com - posed of pairs of genes that encode similar products worms homozygous for mec - 8 ( u314 ) . The region used for the analysis of RNAi should be signiﬁcant with respect to that can apparently substitute for each other , at least under laboratory conditions . One of the ﬁrst discoveries function of the protein , as it encodes many of the WD motifs and includes the site that has undergone the of this nature was the histone genes of S . cerevisiae ( Rykowski et al . 1981 ) . Redundant , or partly redun - sym - 4 mutation , as shown in Figure 7 . Not all phenotypi - cally mutable genes , however , are susceptible to RNAi dant , genes that encode similar products are also well known in C . elegans . Among the examples are lin - 12 in C . elegans ( Fire et al . 1998 ; Kamath and Ahringer 2003 ) . Some of these genes function in the nervous and glp - 1 ( Lambie and Kimble 1991 ) ; ksr - 1 and ksr - 2 ( Ohmachi et al . 2002 ) ; npc - 1 and npc - 2 ( Sym et al . 2000 ) ; system , and others encode stable proteins ( Kamath and Ahringer 2003 ) , but it is safe to say that the cause of and akt - 1 and akt - 2 ( Paradis and Ruvkun 1998 ) . Be - cause the products of both sym - 2 and mec - 8 have copies insusceptibility is not known in every case . That the general conditions used for sym - 3 and sym - 4 are other - of an RNA recognition motif , these genes may also fall in this category . sym - 2 and mec - 8 are , in fact , 2 of 100 wise effective can be seen from the striking effect of the sym - 2 dsRNA on mec - 8 worms . Also , it was possible to genes in C . elegans that encode RRM proteins ( C . elegans Sequencing Consortium 1998 ) . As possibly illustrated elicit phenotypes for other genes on the sym - 3 and sym - 4 cosmids . For example , injection of wild - type worms with by sym - 2 and mec - 8 , redundancy within this family , which dsRNA from R03E1 . 2 results in swollen , rod - like prog - might reﬂect in part an increase in ﬁtness due to greater eny that die in the ﬁrst larval stage . The analysis here accuracy and efﬁciency of having more than one gene did not make use of rrf - 3 worms , which have increased involved in a particular aspect of RNA maturation , might sensitivity to RNAi ( Simmer et al . 2003 ) , but rrf - 3 mutants obscure forward and reverse genetic analyses of these are not completely wild type . In any case , it remains processes , and the analysis of doubly or even triply mu - unknown whether sym - 4 ( mn619 ) is a loss - of - function mu - tants ( or RNAi combinations ) may thus be needed to tation in an otherwise wild - type background . The possi - infer function for many of the RRM genes . bility remains that it may have only a reduction of func - SYM - 2 resembles Drosophila Fusilli and mammalian tion , which is apparent , albeit dramatically so , only in hnRNP F and H in having three copies of the RRM . a mec - 8 mutant background . The mammalian proteins affect alternative splicing of several genes ( Chen et al . 1999 ; Chou et al . 1999 ) , and thus it seems reasonable that SYM - 2 may also affect DISCUSSION alternative splicing , as discussed above in the context The molecular cloning of sym - 2 , sym - 3 , and sym - 4 com - of mec - 8 . Genetic interactions between Fusilli and Cactus pletes the initial analysis of a set of ﬁve genes that were indicate that Fusilli functions downstream of the EGF identiﬁed by their synthetic lethality with mutations in receptor for proper dorsal - ventral polarity of the embryo , the mec - 8 gene ( Davies et al . 1999 ) . Although redundant but its requirement is more general , because homozygotes with mec - 8 , the products of sym - 2 , sym - 3 , and sym - 4 are have a more severe phenotype , an arrest of growth at the distinct from each other and from the products of the end of embryogenesis ( Wakabayashi - Ito et al . 2001 ) . It previously described sym - 1 and sym - 5 genes , which en - is not known whether or not mec - 8 and sym - 2 are required code proteins with leucine - rich repeats ( Davies et al . redundantly downstream of let - 23 , the EFG receptor in 1999 ) . The variety of genes found to be redundant with C . elegans ( Aroian et al . 1990 ) . The combination of mec - 8 probably reﬂects in part an involvement of its mec - 8 and sym - 2 confers embryonic lethality , whereas product in the splicing of transcripts from several genes progeny that are homozygous for a null allele of let - 23 that may not have a structural or functional relationship arrest growth later in development , during the ﬁrst lar - with each other . This is a straightforward conclusion val stage ( Aroian and Sternberg 1991 ; Koga and Ohs - based on the pleiotropy of mec - 8 mutations themselves , hima 1995 ) , but a maternal contribution of let - 23 could indicating an involvement in distinct functions , ranging mask a requirement for the gene during embryogenesis . from mechanosensation and chemosensation to body Although the most straightforward notion is that mec - 8 shape . The almost certain involvement of mec - 8 in the and sym - 2 are required redundantly for the splicing of pre - processing of gene transcripts required for these func - mRNA from one or more vital genes , sym - 2 and mec - 8 also tions makes general conclusions about the extent of illustrate the potential complexity of genetic redun - genetic redundancy uncertain . Nevertheless , mec - 8 and dancy and how this complexity can obfuscate genomic the ﬁve sym genes illustrate the potential extent of ge - analyses . It is also possible , for example , that mec - 8 is netic redundancy : the distinct phenotype of sym - 1 or required for the splicing of a transcript from a gene sym - 5 in a mec - 8 mutant background vs . sym - 3 or sym - 4 that is redundant with another gene that requires sym - 2 implies that at least two different pathways or processes but not mec - 8 . The gene that requires mec - 8 need not are redundant with at least two pathways or processes be related in sequence to the gene that requires sym - 2 . that require mec - 8 . Because the isolation of sym muta - The genes also need not be related in function : they tions is probably not saturated , additional pathways that could act at different steps in two separate develop - are redundant or partly redundant with mec - 8 - depen - dent pathways may yet be discovered . mental or biochemical pathways that are redundant with 1304 J . Yochem , L . R . Bell and R . K . Herman each other . Because the pathways could be redundant within the same cell or tissue , expression of both RRM genes within the same cell cannot distinguish the mech - anism of redundant function . Adding to the potential complexity , the possibility should be considered that sym - 2 affects an aspect of RNA maturation other than splicing . It is unlikely that sym - 3 and sym - 4 encode factors that are interchangeable with MEC - 8 for RNA splicing . Our interpretation of these genes is that they are part of a developmental pathway for proper attachment of the pharynx to the body , but this pathway is redundant with a pathway that has a gene that requires mec - 8 for maturation of its transcript . That sym - 3 and sym - 4 may be part of the same pathway is inferred from the similar - Figure 9 . —Possible overgrowth of tissue at the anterior end ity of their phenotypes in a mec - 8 mutant background of a mec - 8 ; sym - 3 double mutant . ( A ) The normal junction of and from an absence of phenotype for the sym - 3 sym - 4 the pharynx with the outer body as seen in the sym - 3 single double mutant when mec - 8 is wild type . Because redun - mutant of Figure 3D . The anterior and posterior extremes of dant genes sometimes encode similar products , as we the buccal cavity are indicated . ( B ) A schematic indicating the normal locations of the apical parts of the epithelia have seen above , one might search the genome for ( Wright and Thomson 1981 ; Sulston et al . 1983 ) at the genes that resemble sym - 3 or sym - 4 and thereby identify junction of the pharynx and the anterior tip of the body . The candidate genes in a possibly redundant pathway . The cuticle of the body , of the buccal cavity , and of the pharynx C . elegans genome contains 90 genes that encode pro - is indicated by a thick black line . The basement membrane teins with WD repeats ( C . elegans Sequencing Con - of the pharynx is shaded . ( C ) The mec - 8 ; sym - 3 double mutant shown in Figure 3B . The arrows indicate a line of refractivity sortium 1998 ) . Although none seems to be an obvious that tapers in the anterior direction beneath what appears to paralog of sym - 4 on the basis of amino acid sequence , be an overgrowth of hypodermal material at the anterior end . one of these genes could be interchangeable with it . ( D ) A schematic of the bulbous nose in C , with a thin black line sym - 3 , on the other hand , has no obvious counterpart indicating the tapered refractivity . Reminiscent of a normal in the C . elegans genome , and the region that is con - anterior end , the thin line appears to be associated with the buccal cavity . served with mammals and Drosophila is not found in any other predicted gene product in C . elegans . sym - 3 and sym - 4 may be required together for a function in a aberrancy with Nomarski optics or with DAPI staining pathway , but in a redundant pathway , a single gene may of nuclei , that overgrowth may exist is perhaps hinted sufﬁce for this function . It is also possible that sym - 3 is at by an examination of the mec - 8 ; sym - 3 double mutant required for expression of sym - 4 ( or vice versa ) , but the shown in Figure 3B . There appears to be a tapering of gene that is redundant with sym - 4 does not require sym - 3 an interior part of the body toward the anterior tip of for its expression . the mutant ( Figure 9 ) . The size and shape of this inte - The junction of the pharynx with the body cuticle in rior part resemble the size and shape of the anterior wild - type worms involves the cells of the buccal cavity end of a normal worm , and the apparent overgrowth of the pharynx and the hypodermal cell hyp1 , which in of the anterior tip of the mutant is peripheral to this turn is connected to hyp2 ( Wright and Thomson 1981 ; tapered part . Sulston et al . 1983 ) . A signiﬁcant feature of the pheno - The apparent overgrowth of material at the anterior type arising from the combination of sym - 3 or sym - 4 with end raises the possibility that sym - 3 and sym - 4 are in - mec - 8 is that the buccal cavity of the pharynx is of normal volved in redundant , negative regulation of the number , length and morphology ( Figure 3 ) . If the cells of the size , or ploidy of hypodermal cells near or within the cavity are truly wild type , then the pathology might lie junction with the pharynx . If this hypothesis is true , this with the hypodermal cells involved in forming the would be another case of redundant , negative regula - mouth or with other hypodermal cells near the junction tion in C . elegans : the SynMuv genes can be divided into of the pharynx with the outer body . Perhaps these cells two redundant classes of negative regulators of the vulval undergo hypertrophy or hyperplasia , thereby produc - fates of certain hypodermal cells ( Ferguson and Hor - ing a bulge , the bulbous nose , of the anterior end of vitz 1989 ) . Redundant negative regulation may reﬂect the animal and a partial severing of the pharynx from the potential for inappropriate gene expression or for the anterior end , such that there is a nearly constant imprecise control of cell division to lead to decreased distance of the buccal cavity from the anterior end . The ﬁtness for metazoa . Cancer , for instance , is to a large refractile strings of material that appear to connect the extent a perturbation of negative regulation . Regulation buccal cavity to the tip may represent a partially severed connection . Although it has been difﬁcult to assess the in metazoa is thought in general to arise by inhibition 1305 sym - 2 , sym - 3 and sym - 4 of existing cellular processes ( Kirschner and Gerhart several screens for synthetic mutations in C . elegans that have used extrachromosomal arrays . For instance , the 1998 ) , and redundancy may be one means by which inhibitions are efﬁciently imposed : there may be selec - method has been effectively applied to searches for mu - tations that are synthetically lethal with the C . elegans tive pressure for increasing the efﬁciency of inhibition of a particular process by the evolution of an additional retinoblastoma gene lin - 35 ( Fay et al . 2002 , 2003 ) . As for negative regulator . Initially , only partial redundancy the sym genes , the redundant genes identiﬁed in these may exist with respect to the genes encoding these dis - screens often do not resemble each other . As discussed tinct regulators , but in time complete genetic redun - above , one explanation is an increase in ﬁtness due to co - dancy may result . Implicit in this argument is that redun - evolution from distinct origins of redundant pathways for dant regulators may have independent origins and negative regulation of certain developmental processes , therefore may not resemble each other molecularly . such as those requiring cessation of the cell - division cycle . LIN - 35 , the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor ( Lu and sym - 3 and sym - 4 are thought to be part of a pathway Horvitz 1998 ) , may be an example of this in C . elegans : that is redundant with a pathway that requires mec - 8 for it participates redundantly with unrelated proteins in splicing of a transcript of a component gene . If this is negative regulation of cell division during development the case , it should be possible to use the method of ( Boxem and van den Heuvel 2001 , 2002 ; Fay et al . 2002 , extrachromosomal arrays to isolate non - mec - 8 mutations 2003 ) . We believe that the majority of cases in which a that are synthetically lethal with either sym - 3 or sym - 4 gene is redundant with a gene that encodes a dissimilar or , expectedly , with both , with the goal of discovering product will be explained by participation in negative the mec - 8 - dependent gene and other genes in a pathway regulation of a particular process . ( In this argument , that is redundant with a pathway that requires sym - 3 and we are distinguishing true genetic redundancy from sym - 4 . In support of the potential effectiveness of this additive or synergistic “sickness , ” an overwhelming of approach , four mutations , deﬁning three or four genes , an organism caused by a combination of silent or mildly that are synthetically lethal with sym - 1 have been isolated detrimental mutations in unrelated processes . ) ( R . K . Herman , unpublished observations ) . Because Although an improperly attached pharynx is associ - one cannot always predict which genes are redundant ated with other mutations in C . elegans , the phenotype with others , this unbiased method offers one of the of the mec - 8 ; sym - 3 or mec - 8 ; sym - 4 double mutant has not , best ways for enhancing our understanding of genetic to the best of our knowledge , been described before . In redundancy , and the method should add to our under - these other examples , which include the innexin gene standing of particular processes such as attachment of inx - 3 ( Starich et al . 2003 ) and the double - mutant com - body muscles to the cuticle in the case of sym - 1 or attach - bination of lin - 35 and ubc - 18 ( Fay et al . 2003 ) , the phar - ment of the pharynx to the body cuticle in the case of ynx usually does not extend as far anteriorly as described sym - 3 and sym - 4 . herein , and refractile strings between the anterior end We thank Katherine Cygnar for help with the SNP mapping of of the pharynx and the anterior end of the body are sym - 2 , Claire Kari for help with the SNP mapping of sym - 3 , Alan not apparent . Thus , the sym screen may have deﬁned a Coulson for generously providing cosmid clones , Yuri Kohara for new defect in attachment of the pharynx to the body generously providing cDNA clones for the sym - 2 gene , and Jocelyn Shaw for discussions . Some nematode strains were supplied by the cuticle . If sym - 3 and sym - 4 are involved in negative regula - Caenorhabditis Genetics Center , which is supported by a contract tion of a developmental pathway , similar regulation may between the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) National Center for exist in other animals on the basis of possible orthologs Research Resources and the University of Minnesota . Support from in insects and mammals . the NIH ( GM - 22387 ) is gratefully acknowledged . As for sym - 1 and sym - 5 ( Davies et al . 1999 ) , a function for sym - 3 and sym - 4 may have remained undiscovered for some time had it not been for a search for mutations LITERATURE CITED that are synthetically lethal with mec - 8 . Moreover , one Altschul , S . F . , T . L . Madden , A . A . Schaffer , J . Zhang , Z . Zhang could not have easily deduced a priori that these genes et al . , 1997 Gapped BLAST and PSI - BLAST : a new generation would be redundant with mec - 8 . Although the nature ofproteindatabasesearchprograms . NucleicAcidsRes . 25 : 3389 – of its product makes sym - 2 more straightforward , the 3402 . Aroian , R . V . , and P . W . Sternberg , 1991 Multiple functions of let - 23 , approach has also facilitated an analysis of this gene . In a Caenorhabditis elegans receptor tyrosine kinase gene required effect , mec - 8 mutations create a sensitized background for vulval induction . Genetics 128 : 251 – 267 . for isolation of enhancer mutations of various genes Aroian , R . V . , M . Koga , J . E . Mendel , Y . Ohshima and P . W . Stern - berg , 1990 The let - 23 gene necessary for Caenorhabditis elegans whose transcripts require mec - 8 for their maturation or vulval induction encodes a tyrosine kinase of the EGF receptor of various genes that act in consort with or in the same subfamily . Nature 348 : 693 – 699 . pathway as genes whose transcripts require mec - 8 , and Bender , A . , and J . R . Pringle , 1991 Use of a screen for synthetic lethal and multicopy suppressee mutants to identify two new the approach using extrachromosomal arrays that res - genes involved in morphogenesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . cue mec - 8 mutations provides a convenient means of isolat - Cell . Biol . 11 : 1295 – 1305 . ing and maintaining these mutations in a mec - 8 mutant Blumenthal , T . , and K . Steward , 1997 RNA processing and gene structure , pp . 117 – 145 in C . elegans II , edited by D . L . Riddle , background . The screen for sym mutations is one of 1306 J . Yochem , L . R . Bell and R . K . Herman T . Blumenthal , B . J . Meyer andJ . R . Priess . ColdSpringHarbor interactswiththreeothergenes : unc - 52 , smu - 1 and smu - 2 . Genetics 138 : 83 – 101 . Laboratory Press , Plainview , NY . Lundquist , E . A . , R . K . Herman , T . M . Rogalski , G . P . Mullen , Boxem , M . , and S . van den Heuvel , 2001 lin - 35 Rb and cki - 1 Cip / D . G . Moerman et al . , 1996 The mec - 8 gene of C . elegans encodes Kip cooperate in developmental regulation of G1 progression in a protein with two RNA recognition motifs and regulates alterna - C . elegans . Development 128 : 4349 – 4359 . tive splicing of unc - 52 transcripts . Development 122 : 1601 – 1610 . Boxem , M . , and S . van den Heuvel , 2002 C . elegans class B synthetic Mello , C . , and A . Fire , 1995 DNA transformation , pp . 451 – 482 in multivulva genes act in G ( 1 ) regulation . Curr . Biol . 12 : 906 – 911 . Caenorhabditis elegans : Modern Biological Analysis of an Organism , Brenner , S . , 1974 The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans . Genetics edited by H . F . Epstein and D . C . Shakes . Academic Press , San 77 : 71 – 94 . Diego . C . elegans Sequencing Consortium , 1998 Genome sequence of Mello , C . C . , J . M . Kramer , D . Stinchcomb and V . Ambros , 1991 the nematode C . elegans : a platform for investigating biology . Efﬁcient gene transfer in C . elegans : extrachromosomal mainte - Science 282 : 2012 – 2018 . nance and integration of transforming sequences . EMBO J . 10 : Chalﬁe , M . , and J . Sulston , 1981 Developmental genetics of the 3959 – 3970 . mechanosensory neurons of Caenorhabditis elegans . Dev . Biol . 82 : Nowak , M . A . , M . C . Boerlijst , J . Cooke and J . M . Smith , 1997 358 – 370 . Evolution of genetic redundancy . Nature 388 : 167 – 171 . Chen , C . D . , R . Kobayashi and D . M . Helfman , 1999 Binding of Ohmachi , M . , C . E . Rocheleau , D . Church , E . Lambie , T . Schedl hnRNP H to an exonic splicing silencer is involved in the regula - et al . , 2002 C . elegans ksr - 1 and ksr - 2 have both unique and redun - tion of alternative splicing of the rat (cid:8) - tropomyosin gene . Genes dant functionsand are requiredfor MPK - 1ERK phosphorylation . Dev . 13 : 593 – 606 . Curr . Biol . 12 : 427 – 433 . Chou , M . Y . , N . Rooke , C . W . Turck and D . L . Black , 1999 hnRNP Paradis , S . , and G . Ruvkun , 1998 Caenorhabditis elegans Akt / PKB H is a component of a splicing enhancer complex that activates transduces insulin receptor - like signals from AGE - 1 PI3 kinase a c - src alternative exon in neuronal cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 : to the DAF - 16 transcription factor . Genes Dev . 12 : 2488 – 2498 . 69 – 77 . Rogalski , T . M . , B . D . Williams , G . P . Mullen and D . G . Moerman , Cooke , J . , M . A . Nowak , M . Boerlijst and J . Maynard - Smith , 1997 1993 Products of the unc - 52 gene in Caenorhabditis elegans are Evolutionary origins and maintenance of redundant gene expres - homologous to the core protein of the mammalian basement sion during metazoan development . Trends Genet . 13 : 360 – 364 . membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycan . Genes Dev . 7 : 1471 – Davies , A . G . , C . A . Spike , J . E . Shaw and R . K . Herman , 1999 Func - 1484 . tional overlap between the mec - 8 gene and ﬁve sym genes in Rykowski , M . C . , J . W . Wallis , J . Choe and M . Grunstein , 1981 Caenorhabditis elegans . Genetics 153 : 117 – 134 . Histone H2B subtypes are dispensable during the yeast cell cycle . Farrer , T . , A . B . Roller , W . J . Kent and A . M . Zahler , 2002 Analy - Cell 25 : 477 – 487 . sis of the role of Caenorhabditis elegans GC - AG introns in regulated Simmer , F . , C . Moorman , A . M . Van Der Linden , E . Kuijk , P . V . splicing . Nucleic Acids Res . 30 : 3360 – 3367 . Van Den Berghe et al . , 2003 Genome - wide RNAi of C . elegans Fay , D . S . , S . Keenan and M . Han , 2002 fzr - 1 and lin - 35 / Rb function using the hypersensitive rrf - 3 strain reveals novel gene functions . redundantly to control cell proliferation in C . elegans as revealed PLoS Biol . 1 : E12 . by a nonbiased synthetic screen . Genes Dev . 16 : 503 – 517 . Singh , N . , and M . Han , 1995 sur - 2 , a novel gene , functions late in Fay , D . S . , E . Large , M . Han and M . Darland , 2003 lin - 35 / Rb and the let - 60 ras - mediated signaling pathway during Caenorhabditis ubc - 18 , an E2 ubiquitin - conjugating enzyme , function redun - elegans vulval induction . Genes Dev . 9 : 2251 – 2265 . dantly to control pharyngeal morphogenesis in C . elegans . Devel - Spike , C . A . , A . G . Davies , J . E . Shaw and R . K . Herman , 2002 opment 130 : 3319 – 3330 . MEC - 8 regulates alternative splicing of unc - 52 transcripts in C . Ferguson , E . L . , and H . R . Horvitz , 1989 The multivulva pheno - elegans hypodermal cells . Development 129 : 4999 – 5008 . type of certain Caenorhabditis elegans mutants results from defects Starich , T . A . , A . Miller , R . L . Nguyen , D . H . Hall and J . E . Shaw , in two functionally redundant pathways . Genetics 123 : 109 – 121 . 2003 The Caenorhabditis elegans innexin INX - 3 is localized to Fire , A . , S . Xu , M . K . Montgomery , S . A . Kostas , S . E . Driver et gap junctions and is essential for embryonic development . Dev . al . , 1998 Potent and speciﬁc genetic interference by double - Biol . 256 : 403 – 417 . stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature 391 : 806 – 811 . Sulston , J . E . , E . Schierenberg , J . G . White and J . N . Thomson , 1983 Theembryoniccelllineageofthenematode Caenorhabditis Hartwell , L . , 2004 Robust interactions . Science 303 : 774 – 775 . elegans . Dev . Biol . 100 : 64 – 119 . Hresko , M . C . , B . D . Williams and R . H . Waterston , 1994 Assem - Sym , M . , M . Basson and C . Johnson , 2000 A model for Niemann - bly of body wall muscle and muscle cell attachment structures in Pick type C disease in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . Curr . Caenorhabditis elegans . J . Cell Biol . 124 : 491 – 506 . Biol . 10 : 527 – 530 . Jakubowski , J . , and K . Kornfeld , 1999 A local , high - density , single - Thomas , J . H . , 1993 Thinking about genetic redundancy . Trends nucleotidepolymorphismmapusedtoclone Caenorhabditiselegans Genet . 9 : 395 – 399 . cdf - 1 . Genetics 153 : 743 – 752 . Wakabayashi - Ito , N . , M . P . Belvin , D . A . Bluestein and K . V . Kamath , R . S . , and J . Ahringer , 2003 Genome - wideRNAiscreening Anderson , 2001 fusilli , an essential gene with a maternal role in Caenorhabditis elegans . Methods 30 : 313 – 321 . in Drosophila embryonic dorsal - ventral patterning . Dev . Biol . 229 : Kennerdell , J . R . , and R . W . Carthew , 1998 Use of dsRNA - medi - 44 – 54 . ated genetic interference to demonstrate that frizzled and frizzled Wicks , S . R . , R . T . Yeh , W . R . Gish , R . H . Waterston and R . H . 2 act in the wingless pathway . Cell 95 : 1017 – 1026 . Plasterk , 2001 Rapid gene mapping in Caenorhabditis elegans Kirschner , M . , and J . Gerhart , 1998 Evolvability . Proc . Natl . Acad . usingahighdensitypolymorphismmap . Nat . Genet . 28 : 160 – 164 . Sci . USA 95 : 8420 – 8427 . Williams , B . D . , and R . H . Waterston , 1994 Genes critical for Koga , M . , and Y . Ohshima , 1995 Mosaic analysis of the let - 23 gene muscle development and function in Caenorhabditis elegans identi - function in vulval induction of Caenorhabditis elegans . Develop - ﬁed through lethal mutations . J . Cell Biol . 124 : 475 – 490 . ment 121 : 2655 – 2666 . Wright , K . A . , and J . N . Thomson , 1981 The buccal capsule of Lambie , E . J . , and J . Kimble , 1991 Two homologous regulatory Caenorhabditis elegans ( Nematoda : Rhabditoidea ) : an ultrastruc - genes , lin - 12 and glp - 1 , have overlapping functions . Development tural study . Can . J . Zool . 59 : 1952 – 1961 . 112 : 231 – 240 . Yochem , J . , T . Gu and M . Han , 1998 A new marker for mosaic Lu , X . , and H . R . Horvitz , 1998 lin - 35 and lin - 53 , two genes that analysis in Caenorhabditis elegans indicates a fusion between hyp6 antagonize a C . elegans Ras pathway , encode proteins similar to and hyp7 , two major components of the hypodermis . Genetics Rb and its binding protein RbAp48 . Cell 95 : 981 – 991 . 149 : 1323 – 1334 . Lundquist , E . A . , and R . K . Herman , 1994 The mec - 8 gene of Caenor - habditis elegans affects muscle and sensory neuron function and Communicating editor : K . Kemphues