Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy  The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2003 / 03 / 951 / 12 $ 8 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 160 , Number 6 , March 17 , 2003 951 – 962 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200208059 JCB Article 951 Formation of ﬁlopodia - like bundles in vitro from a dendritic network Danijela Vignjevic , 1 Defne Yarar , 2 Matthew D . Welch , 2 John Peloquin , 1 Tatyana Svitkina , 1 and Gary G . Borisy 1 1 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Northwestern University Medical School , Chicago , IL 60611 2 Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 e report the development and characterization of an in vitro system for the formation of ﬁlopodia - like bundles . Beads coated with actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) – activating proteins can induce two distinct types of actin organization in cytoplasmic extracts : ( 1 ) comet tails or clouds displaying a dendritic array of actin ﬁlaments and ( 2 ) stars with ﬁlament bundles radiating from the bead . Actin ﬁlaments in these bundles , like those in ﬁlopodia , are long , unbranched , aligned , uniformly polar , and grow at the barbed end . Like ﬁlopodia , star bundles are enriched in fascin and lack Arp2 / 3 complex and capping protein . Transition from dendritic to bundled organization was induced by depletion of capping protein , and add - back W of this protein restored the dendritic mode . Depletion experiments demonstrated that star formation is dependent on Arp2 / 3 complex . This poses the paradox of how Arp2 / 3 complex can be involved in the formation of both branched ( lamellipodia - like ) and unbranched ( ﬁlopodia - like ) actin structures . Using puriﬁed proteins , we showed that a small number of components are sufﬁcient for the assembly of ﬁlopodia - like bundles : Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) – coated beads , actin , Arp2 / 3 complex , and fascin . We propose a model for ﬁlopodial formation in which actin ﬁlaments of a preexisting dendritic network are elongated by inhibition of capping and subsequently cross - linked into bundles by fascin . Introduction Lamellipodia and filopodia are the two major types of protrusive organelles in crawling cells . Multiple lines of evidence indicate that lamellipodial protrusion occurs by a dendritic nucleation / array treadmilling model ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ; Borisy and Svitkina , 2000 ) . In this model , members of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) * family activate the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex and nucleate the formation of actin filaments on preexisting fila - ments , which function as coactivators ( Higgs and Pollard , 2001 ) . Repeated dendritic nucleation generates a branched array of filaments , as found at the leading edge of cells ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) or in comet tails ( Cameron et al . , 2001 ) . Capping protein functions to cap excessive barbed ends ( Cooper and Schafer , 2000 ) , thus channeling actin polymerization close to the membrane . Whereas lamellipodia seem designed for protrusion over a smooth surface , filopodia seem designed for exploring the extracellular matrix and surfaces of other cells . Filopodia , in contrast to the branched network of lamellipodia , contain an unbranched bundle of actin filaments that are aligned axi - ally , packed tightly together , and of uniform polarity ( Small et al . , 1978 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . Unlike lamellipodia , the Arp2 / 3 complex is excluded from filopodia ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) , and filaments in filopodia are relatively long and do not turn over rapidly ( Mallavarapu and Mitchison , 1999 ) . The roots of filopodia extend well into the cell lamellipodium . As proposed by the filament treadmilling model ( Small et al . , 1994 ) , filaments elongate with their barbed ends oriented toward the leading edge , pushing the membrane and at the same time continuously depolymerizing from the pointed ends . A major question in understanding filopodial formation is how they are initiated . One member of the WASP family , N - WASP , facilitates Cdc42 - induced filopodia formation in cells ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) , suggesting that Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation of actin filaments plays a role in generating parallel bundles . How might Arp2 / 3 complex be involved in the for - mation of unbranched actin structures ? One possibility is that the nucleation and branching activities of Arp2 / 3 com - plex can be separated , resulting in the production of dendritic Address correspondence to Danijela Vignjevic , Northwestern University Medical School , Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , 303 E . Chicago Ave . , Ward 8 - 063 , Chicago , IL 60611 . Tel . : ( 312 ) 503 - 2854 . Fax : ( 312 ) 501 - 7912 . E - mail : nele @ northwestern . edu * Abbreviations used in this paper : Arp2 / 3 , actin - related protein 2 / 3 ; BB , brain buffer ; Ena / VASP , enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ; REF , rat embryo fibroblast ; VCA , verprolin - homology / connecting / acidic domain of WASP ; WASP , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Key words : ﬁlopodia ; actin ; Arp2 / 3 ; capping protein ; fascin Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 952 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 6 , 2003 or parallel actin structures , depending on the way in which it is activated . Another possibility is that the dendritic array initially produced by Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation is subse - quently transformed into parallel bundles of actin filaments . Valuable insights into the mechanism of lamellipodial for - mation and protrusion have been obtained using bacterial - and bead - based in vitro motility systems ( Theriot et al . , 1994 ; Loisel et al . , 1999 ; Cameron et al . , 2000 ) . Filopodial formation is less understood , one reason being that a similar in vitro approach is lacking . In this study , we report the de - velopment of in vitro systems for producing filopodia - like bundles , one of which employs cytoplasmic extracts and an - other that reconstitutes filopodia - like bundles from purified proteins . Using these systems , we provide evidence that filopodia - like bundles are formed by reorganization of the dendritic array . Results Formation of bead - associated actin bundles in extracts Because filopodia are especially abundant in neuronal cell growth cones , we reasoned that brain cytoplasmic extracts might be a good source of filopodia - promoting factors , even though such extracts have previously been demonstrated to support comet tail motility ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ; Yarar et al . , 1999 ) . WASP - coated beads were introduced into rat brain extracts along with rhodamine – actin . Strikingly different structures were found associated with the beads depending on their position on the coverslip . In the center of the cover - slip , beads were associated with a cloud of actin filaments or a typical comet tail ( Fig . 1 A ) . In contrast , at the edge of the coverslip , straight actin bundles radiated from a bead in a star - like configuration ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . These stars repre - sented 84 (cid:2) 10 % ( n (cid:3) 1 , 030 ) of all bead - associated actin structures at the edges of the coverslips ( outermost third of the coverslip radius ) . No stars were found in the center of the coverslips ( innermost third of the radius ) . In the transi - tion zone between the center and edge of the coverslip , we observed large actin clouds and chimeras , structures inter - mediate between tails and stars ( Fig . 1 A ) . To determine whether star formation somehow resulted from special conditions at the coverslip edge , we altered the geometry of sample preparation . In the previous experiment , a 1 - (cid:4) l drop of assay mix was placed on a glass slide , and a coverslip was applied such that the drop spread outward from the coverslip’s center . Here , the coverslip was applied such that one edge contacted the drop of assay mix , which was then forced to spread toward the coverslip’s center . With this design , stars were not observed at the initial con - tacting edge of the coverslip ( n (cid:3) 527 ) , whereas in the cen - ter of the coverslip , stars were abundant ( 83 (cid:2) 10 % , n (cid:3) 675 ) , and in the transition zone , they represented 2 (cid:2) 2 % ( n (cid:3) 745 ) of all structures . Thus , star formation was not a result of proximity to the coverslip edge . Rather , star forma - tion correlated with distance of spreading across the glass surface . One possible explanation for the formation of stars in - stead of comet tails was depletion of some protein ( s ) by ad - sorption to the glass during sample spreading . We tested this idea by blocking and preadsorption experiments . Pretreat - Figure 1 . Different actin structures are assembled on the beads . Actin assembly was assayed on Arp2 / 3 activator - coated beads in brain extract supplemented with rhodamine - labeled actin . ( A ) The pattern of actin assembly depends on the location of the bead on the coverslip . In the center of the coverslip , beads induce the formation of tails . Halfway between the center and edge of the coverslip , actin clouds and chimeras are formed . At the edge of the coverslip , star - like structures are associated with the beads . Beads are shown in yellow . Bar , 5 (cid:4) m . ( B ) Stars are the dominant actin structure at the edge of the sample . Low magnification view of a field at the edge of a coverslip . Bar , 50 (cid:4) m . ( C ) Percentage of stars increases with extract dilution . 1 , center of the coverslip ; 2 , transitional zone ; 3 , edge of the coverslip . ( D ) Percentage of stars produced at the edge of the coverslip in undiluted rat brain extract by beads coated with different Arp2 / 3 - activating proteins . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Filopodia formation in vitro | Vignjevic et al . 953 ment of the coverslip with 1 % BSA blocked star formation , whereas other actin structures ( tails and clouds ) did form ( unpublished data ) , suggesting that protein adsorption to glass plays a critical role in star formation . Preadsorption was performed by mixing extract with ground glass to simulate protein depletion during sample spreading , followed by centrifugation to collect the unadsorbed fraction . Glass - depleted extracts supported star formation throughout the en - tire coverslip , not only at the edges . Further , glass - depleted extracts also supported the formation of stars on WASP - coated beads in plastic tubes . If absorption to glass reduced the concentration of some star - inhibiting factor ( s ) , then simple dilution of the extract might be sufficient to induce stars . Indeed , as shown in Fig . 1 C , when extracts were di - luted fivefold with buffer , stars formed across the entire cov - erslip . The percentage of stars at the center of the coverslip increased from 0 % ( n (cid:3) 1603 ) , for undiluted extracts , to 73 (cid:2) 6 % ( n (cid:3) 542 ) , for extracts diluted fivefold . Thus , the formation of stars could be induced by lowering the concen - tration of some factor ( s ) in the extract . Star formation was not limited to rat brain extracts . Extracts of Xenopus oocytes and rat embryo fibroblasts ( REFs ) also supported star forma - tion ( unpublished data ) , but required greater dilution than rat brain extracts . 10 % Xenopus oocyte extracts and 50 % REF extracts were comparable to full - strength brain extracts in their ability to produce stars . Star formation in extracts is an Arp2 / 3 - dependent process The formation of bundles in association with WASP - coated beads suggested the involvement of the Arp2 / 3 complex . To investigate the role of Arp2 / 3 complex in star assembly , it was depleted from brain extracts by GST – verprolin - homol - ogy / connecting / acidic domain of WASP ( VCA ) sepharose beads . At least 90 % depletion was achieved , as assayed by immunoblotting ( Fig . 2 A ) . In control and mock - depleted extracts , stars were present throughout the entire coverslip , 96 % ( n (cid:3) 126 ) and 90 % ( n (cid:3) 138 ) , respectively ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) . In Arp2 / 3 - depleted extracts ( Fig . 2 D ) , actin assem - bly around the beads was completely abolished ( 0 % , n (cid:3) 213 ) . Only spontaneously polymerized filaments could be observed in the background . Add - back of pure Arp2 / 3 com - plex to the depleted brain extracts restored star formation ( Fig . 2 E ) ( 84 % , n (cid:3) 170 ) , although stars were slightly smaller than in control samples . Based on our immunoblot - ting experiments , the concentration of Arp2 / 3 complex nec - essary to rescue star formation ( 0 . 5 (cid:4) M ) was similar to that calculated to be present in glass - depleted extracts ( 0 . 45 (cid:4) M ) . Lower concentrations of added Arp2 / 3 complex in - duced the formation of branched filaments on the back - ground or actin clouds on the beads . We conclude that star formation is mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex . We next assayed whether star formation would be sup - ported by different Arp2 / 3 activators . Beads were coated with either the bacterial protein ActA or cellular proteins WASP or Scar1 . All activator - coated beads induced star for - mation in rat brain extracts , whereas beads coated with BSA did not ( Fig . 1 D ) . COOH - terminal domains of WASP and Scar ( pVCA ) proteins , which were sufficient for Arp2 / 3 acti - vation ( Higgs and Pollard , 2001 ) , also induced stars in ex - tracts . We also tested whether star formation depended on beads or could also occur on bacteria . Stars assembled on Listeria expressing ActA and on Escherichia coli expressing the Shigella protein IcsA ( unpublished data ) , indicating that Figure 2 . Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for star formation . ( A ) Arp2 / 3 complex depletion in brain extract . Glutathione - Sepharose or glutathione - Sepharose – coupled GST – VCA beads were incubated with 40 (cid:4) l of brain extract . Arp2 / 3 depletion was monitored by immunoblotting using anti - p16 polyclonal antibody . Lane 1 , 10 (cid:4) l of untreated extract ; lane 2 , 10 (cid:4) l of glass - depleted extract ; lane 3 , 10 (cid:4) l of mock - depleted extract ; lane 4 , 10 (cid:4) l of Arp2 / 3 - depleted extract ; lane 5 , Arp2 / 3 associated with glutathione - Sepharose beads ; lane 6 , Arp2 / 3 associated with GST – VCA beads ; lane 7 , pure Arp2 / 3 from bovine brain , 4 (cid:4) g . ( B – E ) Star assembly in Arp2 / 3 - depleted brain extract . ( B ) Control , glass - depleted extract . ( C ) Mock - depleted extract . ( D ) Arp2 / 3 - depleted extract ; stars do not form . ( E ) Arp2 / 3 - depleted extract rescued by add - back of 0 . 64 (cid:4) M pure Arp2 / 3 complex ; star formation is restored . Left panels , phase contrast . Individual 0 . 5 - (cid:4) m beads are visible . Right panels , fluorescence . Bright stars are evident on a background of faint individual filaments in B , C , and E . Only faint filaments are seen in D . Bar , 10 (cid:4) m . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 954 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 6 , 2003 the formation of stars was not restricted to coated synthetic beads . Because Shigella protein IcsA is known to recruit N - WASP from the extracts ( Egile et al . , 1999 ) , this result also suggests that N - WASP supports star formation . Thus , star formation required active Arp2 / 3 complex but did not depend on a specific Arp2 / 3 activator . Stars display both lamellipodial and filopodial types of actin organization The radial bundles comprising stars bear a superficial simi - larity to filopodia in cells . To test whether these two kinds of structures have a deeper similarity , we analyzed the kinetics of star formation , their structural organization , sites of actin incorporation , and protein composition . Star development was observed by time - lapse microscopy . Initially , a diffuse actin cloud was formed around the bead ( Fig . 3 A , 15 min ) . As time progressed , radial actin bundles appeared and began to elongate , with an average rate of 0 . 15 (cid:4) m / min . Finally , we observed long stable actin bundles radiating from the bead - associated cloud . Some bundles in the course of star formation fused together by zippering in a proximal – distal direction , producing thicker bundles ( Fig . 3 B ) . Zippering in a distal – proximal direction was also observed ( unpub - lished data ) . The structural organization of stars was examined by EM of platinum replicas ( Fig . 4 A ) . Proximal to the bead , actin filaments formed a dendritic network , similar to that in lamellipodia . Many long unbranched filaments emanated from this network and , distal to the bead , gradually merged into bundles structurally similar to filopodia . Because one of the hallmarks of native filopodial bundles is uniform polar - ity of actin filaments , we performed myosin S1 decoration of actin filaments in stars to determine their polarity . The high density of filaments near the bead prevented determination of filament polarity in this region as well as in tight bundles . However , in the looser bundles distal to the bead ( (cid:5) 1 (cid:4) m ) , 93 % ( n (cid:3) 429 ) of actin filaments had uniform polarity with their barbed ends pointing away from the bead ( Fig . 4 B ) . Thus , stars display both lamellipodial ( dendritic network ) and filopodial ( parallel bundle ) types of actin organization , with the transition from one to the other occurring with dis - tance away from the bead . The transition appeared as bun - dling of long filaments arising from the dendritic network . Sites of actin polymerization in stars were analyzed by pulse - labeling experiments . After allowing stars to form , the distribution of newly incorporated rhodamine - labeled actin was determined relative to total actin , which was labeled with fluorescein - conjugated phalloidin ( Fig . 4 C ) . Two ma - jor sites of actin incorporation were found : near the bead and at the tips of actin bundles . We interpret bead - associ - ated sites to represent the growth of branches nucleated by WASP - activated Arp2 / 3 complex . In contrast , we interpret the incorporation at tips of radial bundles to represent elon - gation from preexisting , uncapped barbed ends , because no branched filaments were observed by EM at the tips of bun - dles . Actin incorporation was sometimes seen along the bun - dle , distant from its tip , consistent with EM data showing that some filaments in the bundle are shorter than others . This may result from unequal elongation of filaments or zip - pering of bundles of unequal length . Thus , stars display two modes of actin polymerization : Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation at the bead , similar to that in lamellipodia , and barbed - end elongation at the tips of bundles , like that in filopodia . Lamellipodia and comet tails , on the one hand , and filopo - dia in cells , on the other hand , have distinct protein composi - tion ( Goldberg , 2001 ; Small et al . , 2002 ) . For example , the Arp2 / 3 complex and capping protein are present in lamellipo - dia and comet tails but have not been found in filopodia ( Svit - kina and Borisy , 1999 ; Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) , whereas fascin is enriched in filopodia and less abundant in lamellipodia ( Ku - reishy et al . , 2002 ) . (cid:6) - Actinin has been found in lamellipodia ( Langanger et al . , 1984 ) but only in the roots of filopodia ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . We determined the localization of these proteins in stars by immunofluorescence staining or by incorporation of the labeled protein ( Fig . 5 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and capping protein were found in the dendritic network proximal to the bead but not in actin bundles . (cid:6) - Actinin was clearly enriched around the bead but could be faintly detected in bundles when a high amount of exogenous protein was added . In contrast , fascin was strongly localized to actin bun - dles but was diminished in the network surrounding the bead . Thus , by structural , kinetic , and biochemical criteria , our data demonstrate that the proximal dendritic network and radial bundles of stars are similar to the actin organization of lamelli - podia and filopodia , respectively . Parallel bundle formation can be shifted to dendritic network formation by capping protein The absorption and dilution experiments indicated that re - duced levels of factor ( s ) in the extract are critical in shifting Figure 3 . Kinetics of star formation . ( A ) Time - lapse sequence of star assembly in rat brain extract . Bar , 5 (cid:4) m . ( B ) Actin bundle zippering . Two bundles zipper together in a centrifugal direction . Time shown in min . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Filopodia formation in vitro | Vignjevic et al . 955 the balance from a dendritic organization toward parallel bundles of actin . Several considerations suggest that one likely candidate for this role is capping protein . First , it has been shown ( DiNubile et al . , 1995 ) that increasing the con - centration of neutrophil extract , and thus concentration of added capping protein , inhibited the extent and rate of poly - merization of actin on spectrin – actin seeds . Conversely , we interpret that in our system , star formation after dilution or glass depletion might be due to decreased capping protein concentration . Second , when bacterial motility was reconsti - tuted from purified proteins , suboptimal concentrations of capping protein ( 35 nM ) produced comet tails with a fish - bone appearance ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) , similar to chimeras observed in our samples in the transitional zone ( Fig . 1 A ) . Figure 4 . Structural organization of stars and polarity of actin assembly . ( A ) Actin filaments form a dendritic network around the bead and filament bundles away from the bead . Platinum replica EM . Bar , 0 . 5 (cid:4) m . Overview of the star is shown in the left inset . Examples of branched filaments are highlighted in yellow and enlarged in the small panels at right . ( B ) Actin filaments in bundles are oriented with their barbed end away from the bead . Polarity of actin filaments was determined by myosin S1 decoration and is indicated by arrowheads . The bead is on the left . Bar , 0 . 1 (cid:4) m . ( C ) Actin assembly occurs at tips of bundles and around the bead . Pulse labeling of actin incorporation . Rhodamine – actin ( red ) marks sites of new actin incorporation . All actin filaments were labeled with FITC – phalloidin ( green ) . Bar , 5 (cid:4) m . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 956 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 6 , 2003 Third , immunostaining for capping protein detected high levels of fluorescence on the coverslip ( Fig . 3 ) , suggesting that capping protein was adsorbed to the glass and thus de - pleted from the extract . Therefore , we investigated whether star formation was dependent on the concentration of cap - ping protein in the extract . Capping protein concentration was estimated in terms of a chicken capping protein standard by immunoblotting . Rat brain extracts contained 3 . 8 ng / (cid:4) l ( 58 nM ) and REF ex - tracts contained 8 ng / (cid:4) l ( 122 nM ) capping protein ( Fig . 6 A ) . The twofold higher concentration of capping protein in REF extracts was consistent with the twofold dilution of this extract required to produce stars . We were unable to esti - mate the concentration of capping protein in Xenopus oocyte extracts because of a lack of cross - reactivity of the antibodies used . The initial total protein concentration for all tested ex - tracts was similar : brain extract , 16 mg / ml ; REF , 21 mg / ml ; and Xenopus oocyte , 24 mg / ml . Next , we examined how much capping protein was depleted from brain extract by its adsorption on ground glass . As assayed by immunoblotting , 35 % of capping protein was depleted ( Fig . 6 B ) , whereas ac - tin was not depleted ( 0 % ) ( Fig . 6 B ) , Arp2 / 3 was 18 % de - pleted ( Fig . 2 A ) , and fascin was only 8 % depleted ( unpub - lished data ) . These results demonstrate that glass absorbs motility proteins differentially and that capping protein is preferentially depleted . Next , we supplemented 50 % diluted brain extract with increasing amounts of exogenous capping protein . Capping protein inhibited star formation and facilitated cloud forma - tion in a concentration - dependent manner ( Fig . 6 C ) . In a kinetic analysis using time - lapse observation , addition of 50 nM capping protein to the extract ( which normally pro - duced mostly stars ) blocked bundle formation around beads but allowed for continuous growth of actin clouds up to 20 times the bead diameter ( Fig . 6 D ) . EM analysis of such clouds showed that actin filaments were organized into an extended dendritic network ( Fig . 6 E ) . Higher concentra - tions of added capping protein , as expected , inhibited the extensive growth of clouds ( unpublished data ) . At 400 nM capping protein , the diameter of the cloud was reduced to approximately twice the bead diameter . These results show that parallel bundle formation can be shifted to extended dendritic network formation by an optimal level of capping protein . As a specificity control , other proteins known to participate in actin dynamics were added to glass - depleted and diluted brain extracts . Addition of actin ( 7 . 5 (cid:4) M ) , Arp2 / 3 complex ( 0 . 05 , 0 . 1 , and 0 . 6 (cid:4) M ) , profilin ( 1 . 0 , 2 . 5 , and 10 (cid:4) M ) , cofilin ( 2 . 5 , 5 . 0 , and 10 (cid:4) M ) , and (cid:6) - actinin ( 0 . 15 , 0 . 25 , 0 . 35 , and 0 . 5 (cid:4) M ) did not affect star forma - tion , whereas addition of 50 nM capping protein blocked star formation but allowed growth of actin clouds . These re - sults show that capping protein was specific in antagonizing star formation . Reconstitution of filopodia - like bundles using pure proteins We tried to define a minimal set of components necessary for star assembly . Because data obtained with extracts indi - cated that Arp2 / 3 complex was necessary and capping pro - tein had to be depleted , initial reconstitution experiments were performed with WASP - coated beads , actin , and Arp2 / 3 complex . Concentrations of proteins were based on pub - lished data for reconstitution of comet tails ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . Beads coated with WASP were put into physiological ionic strength buffer solution , pH 7 , containing rhodamine - labeled actin ( 6 . 9 (cid:4) M ) and increasing amounts of Arp2 / 3 complex over the range 0 . 1 – 0 . 9 (cid:4) M . At 0 . 7 (cid:4) M Arp2 / 3 complex and above , actin polymerization at the bead surface resulted in clouds within 15 min ( Fig . 7 A ) . Clouds were (cid:2) 3 . 2 mm in diameter ( measured as full width at 1 / e of max - imum fluorescence ) and were azimuthally homogeneous in intensity except for apparently stochastic fluctuations . Lower concentrations of Arp2 / 3 did not generate clouds or did so more slowly . Because Arp2 / 3 alone was insufficient to induce stars , we then introduced a bundling protein . Fascin was selected to complement the reconstitution system because it is the ma - jor bundler in filopodia and in star bundles formed in ex - tracts . Recombinant fascin was used in these experiments . Fascin was added to samples of WASP - coated beads prein - cubated with Arp2 / 3 complex ( 0 . 7 (cid:4) M ) and actin ( 6 . 9 (cid:4) M ) Figure 5 . Localization of actin binding proteins in stars . Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein , and (cid:6) - actinin are enriched near the beads but not in bundles , whereas fascin is enriched in bundles but is not prominent at beads . Stars were labeled with rhodamine – actin ( green ) and FITC – (cid:6) - actinin ( red ) during assembly . Immunostaining for Arp2 / 3 ( p16 Arc ) , capping protein ( (cid:7) 2 ) , or fascin ( red ) was performed after fixation of stars . Bar , 5 (cid:4) m . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Filopodia formation in vitro | Vignjevic et al . 957 on ice for 20 min , and star formation was evaluated within 15 min incubation at RT . Increasing amounts of fascin pro - moted bundle formation both on beads and of filaments in the background . At 3 . 1 (cid:4) M fascin , (cid:5) 95 % of the beads showing actin polymerization displayed stars with straight , needle - like rays ( Fig . 7 B ) . EM demonstrated that the star bundles formed in the presence of fascin were composed of long actin filaments that were packed tightly together ( Fig . 7 C ) , similar to those of filopodia and bundles made in ex - tracts . The actin cross - linking protein , (cid:6) - actinin , also gener - ated star - like structures , but they were qualitatively different from those induced by fascin . The bundles of (cid:6) - actinin stars were wavy , not straight , and EM showed them to consist of loosely packed and cross - linked filaments ( unpublished data ) , as previously reported for mixtures of (cid:6) - actinin and actin ( Jockusch and Isenberg , 1982 ) . The reconstitution ex - periments demonstrate that in the absence of barbed - end capping , four components , WASP - coated beads , Arp2 / 3 complex , actin , and fascin , are sufficient for star formation . Discussion Formation of filopodia - like structures in vitro and initia - tion of filopodia in the cellular context ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) reveal remarkable similarities . A comparison of these two processes is presented in Fig . 8 . The initial step , den - dritic nucleation of actin filaments , is essentially the same in both cases . Nucleation is driven by activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex and results in the formation of new branches on preexisting filaments . Under conditions where capping activity is favored , filaments not specifically pro - tected become terminated soon after nucleation , resulting in an overall dendritic organization , forming tails or clouds in the bead assay ( Fig . 8 , top left ) and lamellipodia in cells Figure 6 . Formation of stars depends on the concentration of capping protein . ( A ) Capping protein concentration in rat brain and REF extracts ( 7 . 5 (cid:4) l per lane ) was determined by Western blotting . Purified CapZ was used as a standard at concentrations shown above the respective lanes . ( B ) Capping protein and actin concentration in control and glass - depleted brain extract . ( C ) Addition of capping protein inhibits star formation . Percentage of the indicated bead - associated structure ( Y axis ) is shown versus concentration of added capping protein ( X axis ) to the 50 % diluted rat brain extract . ( D ) Addition of capping protein induces growth of clouds . Time - lapse sequence of actin assembly around a WASP - coated bead in 50 % brain extract supplemented with 50 nM capping protein . Bar , 5 (cid:4) m . ( E ) Dendritic organization of clouds formed after the addition of 50 nM capping protein to the 50 % brain extract . Bar , 0 . 2 (cid:4) m . Overview of the cloud is shown in the left panel . Bar , 1 (cid:4) m . Examples of branched filaments are highlighted in boxes and enlarged in small right panels . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 958 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 6 , 2003 Figure 7 . Reconstitution of filopodia - like bundles from pure proteins . Samples of WASP - coated beads preincubated on ice with 6 . 9 (cid:4) M rhodamine - labeled actin and 0 . 7 (cid:4) M Arp2 / 3 complex were brought to RT to allow for actin assembly . ( A ) Actin clouds formed in the absence of fascin . ( B ) Addition of 3 . 1 (cid:4) M fascin to the sample before incubation at RT produced stars . Low magnification panels ( top row ) show distinctive pattern of actin assembly under each condition . ( C ) EM of star bundles formed in the presence of fascin as in B . Bars : ( top row ) 50 (cid:4) M ; ( bottom row ) 5 (cid:4) m ; ( C ) 100 nm . ( top right ) . In the in vitro system , using activator - coated beads , a reduced concentration of capping protein allows filaments to remain uncapped and continue elongation , fol - lowed by cross - linking into bundles to form stars ( Fig . 8 , bottom left ) . In the cellular context , where the cytoplasmic concentration of capping protein is presumably high , we postulate that filaments with barbed ends at the membrane are protected from capping , allowing them to elongate and be bundled to form filopodia ( bottom right ) . Thus , we rec - ognize three processes to be necessary for star or filopodia formation : nucleation , elongation , and bundling . These three processes and the molecules likely to be involved in them are discussed in turn . Nucleation The Arp2 / 3 complex is thought to play a role in filopodia formation because one of its activators , N - WASP , induces filopodia in cells ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . Because Arp2 / 3 is ab - sent from established filopodia ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ; Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) , one may infer that it likely participates in initiation , not in steady - state elongation of filopodia . The question then becomes precisely how the Arp2 / 3 complex is involved in the initiation process . We suggest that our in vitro system for producing filopodia - like bundles reflects the situation in vivo and provides insights into the mechanism . First , formation of filopodia - like bundles , as well as den - dritic clouds , depended on the presence and activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex . These findings agree with the observations in vivo , that perturbation of Arp2 / 3 complex function in - hibits the formation of both lamellipodia and filopodia ( Ma - chesky and Insall , 1998 ; Li et al . , 2002 ) . Localization of Arp2 / 3 in stars was also analogous to the in vivo situation ; it was present in dendritic arrays at the base of bundles , but not in bundles per se . One possibility for how the action of the Arp2 / 3 complex can be explained is that it promotes dendritic or filopodial initiation depending upon the specific Arp activator . This Figure 8 . Model for the formation of filopodial bundles . We propose that filopodia are formed from a preexisting dendritic network by barbed - end elongation of actin filaments and their subsequent cross - linking into bundles . At normal levels of capping activity , clouds and tails are formed around the bead in the in vitro system ( top left ) , and lamellipodia are formed in cells ( top right ) . If the concentration of capping protein is lowered in the in vitro system , filaments elongate and become bundled by cross - linking proteins , e . g . , fascin ( bottom left ) . Two examples of cross - linking are presented . Thin bundles may further zipper into the thicker bundles ( arrows ) . In the cell , some filament barbed ends at the membrane become protected from capping , perhaps by Ena / VASP proteins , so that they can elongate and be cross - linked to form bundles in filopodia ( bottom right ) . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Filopodia formation in vitro | Vignjevic et al . 959 idea is consistent with findings that different members of the WASP family vary in their ability to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Zalevsky et al . , 2001 ) . However , we found no sig - nificant differences in the process of star formation when they were induced by a variety of Arp2 / 3 activators , includ - ing ActA , WASP , Scar , N - WASP , and the pVCA COOH - terminal domains of WASP and Scar . ActA was active both as endogenous bacterial protein and as a recombinant pro - tein at the bead surface . Thus , our data do not support a model that Arp2 / 3 complex produces different arrays de - pending on the specific activator . Our data are in agreement with a model in which the Arp2 / 3 complex , irrespective of its activator , produces a nor - mal dendritic array , which subsequently becomes reorga - nized into bundles . Time - lapse observations showed that diffuse clouds with dendritic organization preceded the for - mation of bundles . Structural studies demonstrated a grad - ual transition from dendritic arrays around the bead to distal radial bundles . Both results suggest that a normal dendritic network serves as a precursor for bundles . These results are in close agreement with recent results elucidating the in vivo mechanism of filopodial initiation ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . We propose that the role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in the in vitro system is to supply barbed ends . The high local con - centration of barbed ends created by activator - coated beads and the high concentration of Arp2 / 3 in solution were es - sential for bundle formation . A similar method may be used by cells if Arp2 / 3 activators ( or molecules recruiting them ) are not evenly distributed along the leading edge , but exist in clusters . A high local concentration of barbed ends could also be created by the clustering of some barbed end – bind - ing molecules at the membrane . Possible candidates for such a role are members of the enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( Ena / VASP ) family ( Bear et al . , 2002 ; Svit - kina et al . , 2003 ) and formins ( Pruyne et al . , 2002 ) , which have recently been shown to bind barbed ends but allow for filament elongation . Formins can also nucleate unbranched actin filaments ( Pruyne et al . , 2002 ; Sagot et al . , 2002b ) and thus are candidates for an alternative , Arp2 / 3 - independent pathway of bundle initiation , similar to how actin cables in yeast are formed ( Evangelista et al . , 2002 ; Sagot et al . , 2002a ) . However , this mechanism does not account for the N - WASP induction of filopodia . Elongation After filaments are nucleated , they have to elongate and en - counter each other before they can form a bundle . A priori , elongation of filaments could be facilitated by increasing the concentration of an “elongation” factor or by decreasing the concentration of a “termination” factor . The main argu - ments in favor of the latter possibility are that star formation was induced in extracts by depletion of capping protein and was antagonized specifically by add - back of capping protein . A key point here is that add - back of capping protein to de - pleted extracts did not simply block all actin polymerization . Rather , it induced the formation of clouds as opposed to stars . Our interpretation is that cloud formation was the re - sult of the termination of filament elongation shortly after branch nucleation under conditions when active Arp2 / 3 complex continuously nucleates new filaments . This process results in short filaments and a dense dendritic network . The fact that stars could be reconstituted in a pure protein sys - tem lacking barbed - end capping proteins but allowing for filament nucleation , elongation , and bundling is consistent with the interpretation that star formation was facilitated by decreasing a termination factor . In the cellular context , the cytoplasmic concentration of capping protein is high ( Huang et al . , 1999 ) . In lamellipodia where barbed ends are constantly being produced , the high concentration of capping protein can be understood as nec - essary to cap unproductive barbed ends . In filopodia where filaments elongate continuously , their barbed ends need to be protected from capping . Protection may be provided by Ena / VASP family proteins because they are present at the extreme leading edge , bind to barbed ends , and can antago - nize capping in vitro and in vivo ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Ena / VASP proteins are also enriched at the tips of filopodia ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ) and become gradu - ally accumulated at the tips of filopodial precursors during the filopodial initiation ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . It is attractive to speculate that the presence of Ena / VASP at the filopodial tips in the cellular context prevents filament termination and allows filopodial elongation . Consistent with this idea , our results showing that the level of capping protein controls the transition between two types of actin arrays in vitro match the observations that the level of Ena / VASP proteins performs analogous control in vivo , but in the opposite di - rection . That is , a low level of Ena / VASP induced short branched filaments , and an excess of Ena / VASP promoted the formation of long filaments ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . In our in vitro system , the rates of bundle elongation in stars were (cid:2) 0 . 15 (cid:4) m / min , similar to the reported rates of comet tail motility in undiluted brain extracts ( 0 . 2 – 0 . 3 (cid:4) m / min ) ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ; Yarar et al . , 1999 ) . Whereas in Xenopus oocyte extract or during leading edge protrusion in cells , the rates of actin array assembly are at least an order of magnitude higher ( Mallavarapu and Mitchison , 1999 ) . These observations indicate that additional factors may con - tribute to the overall performance of actin machinery , but balance between nucleation and elongation seems to be crit - ical for the determination of supramolecular organization of the actin array . Bundling Bundling is necessary to allow long filaments to push effi - ciently without buckling under the cell surface . The leading candidate for filament bundling in filopodia is fascin . It shows the greatest enrichment in filopodial bundles in cells ( Kureishy et al . , 2002 ) , where it significantly prevails over (cid:6) - actinin ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) , and it is essential for the maintenance of filopodia ( Yamashiro et al . , 1998 ; Adams et al . , 1999 ; Cohan et al . , 2001 ) . Consistent with in vivo data , we found that fascin was the major bundling protein present in stars assembled in cyto - plasmic extracts . Fascin was also sufficient to form filopodia - like bundles in a reconstitution system in which fascin repre - sented the only bundling protein . The straightness of the fascin - induced star bundles suggests that they were quite rigid , similar to filopodia . In contrast to fascin , the other ac - tin filament cross - linker , (cid:6) - actinin , was more abundant in Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 960 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 6 , 2003 the dendritic network surrounding beads and was absent from star bundles . Although (cid:6) - actinin was also able to drive star assembly in a reconstitution system , the resulting star bundles had wavy rays and a dendritic , not parallel bundled , organization . Thus , (cid:6) - actinin did not recapitulate filopodia formation in vitro . These results suggest that the two cross - linkers may be specialized with respect to the particular actin filament array that they stabilize . Segregation of fascin and (cid:6) - actinin to bundles and the dendritic network , respectively , correlates with the biochemical properties of these two cross - linkers : fascin is a short cross - linker that makes tight paral - lel bundles ( Yamashiro - Matsumura and Matsumura , 1985 ) and (cid:6) - actinin is a longer molecule that , when combined with actin , makes loose bundles with both parallel and anti - parallel filament orientation . The absence of (cid:6) - actinin in filopodial bundles in more complex systems , such as extracts or cells , when both proteins are present may be explained as fascin outcompeting (cid:6) - actinin because of a slightly higher affinity or , possibly , specific recruitment to areas of filopo - dial assembly . In the course of star formation , we frequently observed zippering of radial bundles , an effect that superficially re - sembles fusion of filopodia during their normal dynamics in cells . However , distinctions between these two phenomena should be noted . In cells , the fusion site moves backward be - cause of treadmilling and retrograde flow of the whole as - sembly , but no actual displacement of bundles , with respect to each other , occurs . In stars , we did not find independent indications of retrograde flow , suggesting that zippering in vitro actually brings distant bundles together . A likely reason for the difference between the two systems is that the move - ment of bundles in vivo is precluded by the more crowded conditions and cross - linking occurring in the cytoplasm , compared with extracts . Nevertheless , the similarity of the systems suggests that cross - linking molecules , presumably fascin , have a potential for zippering and may accomplish this function under permissive circumstances , for formation of bundles in vitro and for filopodia in vivo . In summary , our results suggest that an Arp2 / 3 - mediated pathway is compatible with filopodia formation , and that it is not necessary to postulate unusual properties of WASP family members to stimulate a nonbranching mode of actin filament formation . Filopodia - like structures can be ac - counted for as a transformation from a dendritic organiza - tion by a combination of elongation and bundling . Materials and methods Proteins Actin was purified from rabbit muscle as previously described ( Spudich and Watt , 1971 ) . Rhodamine – actin was prepared by labeling actin with N - hydroxy succinimido - rhodamine ( Molecular Probes ) as previously de - scribed ( Isambert et al . , 1995 ) and stored at (cid:8) 80 (cid:9) C . Before use , labeled G - actin was recycled by polymerization for 2 h on ice in the presence of 50 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM ATP , sedimentation at 100 , 000 g for 1 . 5 h at 4 (cid:9) C , resuspension in cold G buffer ( 2 mM Tris - Cl , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , and 0 . 5 mM DTT ) to a final concentration of 2 mg / ml , and dialysis overnight against G buffer using microdialysis buttons ( Hampton Research ) and dialysis tubing ( Pierce Chemical Co . ) . DNA encoding WASP tagged at its NH 2 terminus with both Met , Arg , Gly , Ser ( MRGS ) 6xHis and FLAG epitopes was amplified by PCR from a human WASP cDNA ( a gift of Arie Abo , PPD Discovery , Menlo Park , CA ) and subcloned into pFastBac1 ( Life Technologies ; Amersham Biosciences ) . DNA encoding human Scar1 was amplified by PCR and subcloned into the WASP - pFastbac1 vector in the place of the WASP DNA . Recombinant WASP and Scar1 proteins were expressed in Sf9 cells using the baculovirus system . Baculovirus strains were generated and used for infections accord - ing to the Bac - to - Bac baculovirus expression system ( Life Technologies ) . After 72 h of infection , cells were harvested by centrifugation at 500 g for 10 min at 25 (cid:9) C , resuspended in lysis buffer ( 50 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , pH 8 . 0 , 300 mM KCl ) with protease inhibitors ( 1 mM PMSF and 10 (cid:4) g / ml leupeptin , pepstatin , and chymostatin [ LPC ] ) , and frozen in liquid N 2 . To prepare the lysate , cells were thawed and centrifuged at 200 , 000 g for 15 min at 4 (cid:9) C . To purify the recombinant proteins , Sf9 lysates were supplemented with 20 mM imidazole , incubated with Ni - NTA agarose ( QIAGEN ) resin for 45 min at 4 (cid:9) C , washed with 50 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , pH 8 . 0 , 300 mM KCl , 20 mM imidazole , and eluted with 200 mM imidazole , 50 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , pH 8 . 0 , 300 mM KCl , and protease inhibitors . Eluted proteins were further purified by gel filtration chromatography on a Superdex - 200 column ( Amersham Biosciences ) equilibrated with 20 mM MOPS , pH 7 . 0 , 100 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM EGTA , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 10 % vol / vol glycerol . Full - length recombinant WASP has constitutive ability to activate Arp2 / 3 complex ( Higgs and Pollard , 2001 ) . DNA encoding human fascin was amplified by PCR and sublcloned into the pGEX - 4T - 3 vector ( Amersham Biosciences ) using BamH1 / Xho I sites . Recombinant human fascin was prepared by a modification of the method of Ono et al . ( 1997 ) . E . coli carrying the plasmid was grown at 37 (cid:9) C until the A600 reached 0 . 6 . Protein expression was induced by add - ing 0 . 1 mM IPTG at 20 (cid:9) C for 4 h . Cells were harvested by centrifugation and extracted with B - PER in phosphate buffer ( Pierce Chemical Co . ) plus 1 mM PMSF and 1 mM DTT . The lysate was centrifuged at 20 , 000 g for 20 min , and the supernatant was mixed for 1 h at RT with 2 ml glutathione – Sepharose 4B ( Amersham Biosciences ) equilibrated with PBS plus 1 mM DTT . The glutathione - Sepharose was poured into a column and washed with 20 ml of PBS plus 1 mM DTT . 80 (cid:4) l of thrombin ( Amersham Bio - sciences ) was added , and digestion was allowed to proceed overnight at 4 (cid:9) C . Flowthrough fractions were collected in 2 mM PMSF and concen - trated by Centricon 10 ( Amicon ) . Arp2 / 3 was purified from bovine brain as described by Laurent et al . ( 1999 ) . Recombinant chicken CapZ ( Soeno et al . , 1998 ; Palmgren et al . , 2001 ) was provided by John Cooper ( Washington University School of Medicine , St . Louis , MO ) . FITC - labeled (cid:6) - actinin was provided by Marion Greaser ( University of Wisconsin , Madison , WI ) . ActA protein ( Cameron et al . , 1999 ) was provided by Julie Theriot ( Stanford University School of Medicine , Stanford , CA ) . Recombinant human cofilin and human profilin were purchased from Cytoskeleton , Inc . Cytoplasmic extracts Rat brain extract was prepared as previously described ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ) . Metaphase Xenopus oocyte extract was prepared as previously de - scribed ( Murray , 1991 ) and kept frozen at (cid:8) 80 (cid:9) C . Before use , it was centri - fuged at 100 , 000 g for 1 h at 4 (cid:9) C , and the supernatant was used for experi - ments . Rat embryonic fibroblast extract was prepared as described by Saoudi et al . ( 1998 ) . Actin polymerization bead assay Carboxylated polystyrene beads ( Polysciences ) were coated with ActA as previously described ( Cameron et al . , 1999 ) . For coating beads with WASP / Scar proteins , we took 15 (cid:4) l of 0 . 5 (cid:4) M WASP or Scar proteins , mixed up with 15 (cid:4) l of brain buffer ( BB ) ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ) or Xenopus buffer ( Mur - ray , 1991 ) and 0 . 5 (cid:4) l of 0 . 5 - (cid:4) m carboxylated polystyrene beads . This mix - ture was incubated at RT for 1 h . Beads were washed twice with the appro - priate buffer and resuspended in 10 (cid:4) l of buffer . For longer storage , beads were supplemented with 50 % glycerol and placed at (cid:8) 80 (cid:9) C . Coated beads ( 0 . 5 (cid:4) l ) were introduced into 10 (cid:4) l of cell extract supple - mented with energy mix ( 15 mM creatine phosphate , 2 mM ATP , and 2 mM MgCl 2 ) and 1 . 25 (cid:4) M rhodamine - labeled actin . In experiments to eval - uate the effect of capping protein concentration , the assay mix was supple - mented with increasing amounts of capping protein . The assay mix was in - cubated on ice for 1 h before preparation for observation . For reconstitution system , 0 . 5 (cid:4) l of coated beads was introduced in 1 (cid:10) KME buffer ( 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 10 mM imidazole , pH 7 ) supplemented with Arp2 / 3 complex . After incubation for 5 min at RT , 6 . 9 (cid:4) M actin was added , and the mixture was incubated on ice for 20 min before the addition of fascin and allowing for actin assembly at RT . Microscopy For light microscopy , a 1 - (cid:4) l sample was removed and pressed tightly be - tween a microscope slide and a 22 - mm square glass to create a chamber (cid:2) 5 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Filopodia formation in vitro | Vignjevic et al . 961 (cid:4) m thick , which was then sealed with vaseline / lanolin / paraffin ( at 1 : 1 : 1 ) . Samples were incubated at RT for 15 min and then observed with a Nikon Eclipse inverted microscope equipped with phase contrast and epifluores - cence optics . Time - lapse images were acquired with a back - thinned CCD camera ( CH250 ; Photometrics ) using METAMORPH ( Universal Imaging Corp . ) software . Fluorescence images were recorded every 5 min for 2 h . For EM , samples were prepared as described by Cameron et al . ( 2001 ) . After incubation for 2 h at RT in a humid environment , chambers were opened into solution containing 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 and 2 (cid:4) M phalloidin in BB . Although some stars were washed out during this procedure , some remained attached to the coverslip . Coverslips were washed with 2 (cid:4) M phalloidin in BB , fixed with 2 % glutaraldehyde , and processed for EM . Procedures for S1 decoration and EM were as previously described ( Svit - kina and Borisy , 1998 ) . Polarity of filaments , determined in blind experi - ments by two independent observers , gave similar results . Immunostaining Rabbit polyclonal antibody to the Arc p16 subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex was prepared against the RFRKVDVDEYDENKFVDEED peptide of the hu - man sequence . By Western blotting , the affinity - purified antibody recog - nized in rat brain extract a doublet of closely spaced bands in the16 - kD range , supposedly corresponding to two isoforms of Arc p16 ( Millard et al . , 2003 ) . Polyclonal rabbit antibody against capping protein ( R22 ) was pro - vided by Dorothy A . Schafer ( University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA ) . Mouse monoclonal (cid:6) - actinin antibody was from Sigma - Aldrich , and mouse monoclonal fascin antibody was from DakoCytomation . Immuno - staining was performed in perfusion chambers . Solutions were applied on one side of the chamber with a pipet and withdrawn from the other side with filter paper . A 4 - (cid:4) l assay sample was sandwiched between a glass slide and a coverslip ( 22 (cid:10) 22 mm ) separated by two strips of teflon tape and sealed . Stars were allowed to form for 2 h at RT in humid conditions . 10 (cid:4) l of BB containing 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 and 2 (cid:4) M phalloidin was per - fused through the chamber , followed by 10 (cid:4) l of 2 (cid:4) M phalloidin in BB . For most immunostaining experiments , stars were fixed with 0 . 2 % glutaral - dehyde for 20 min at RT , washed with PBS , and quenched for 20 min with 2 mg / ml of NaBH 4 in PBS supplemented with 0 . 1 % Tween 20 . For fascin staining , samples were fixed with methanol for 10 min at (cid:8) 20 (cid:9) C . Pulse - labeling assay Stars were allowed to form for 1 h in a perfusion chamber containing 4 (cid:4) l of assay sample without labeled actin . Then 1 (cid:4) l of 1 . 8 (cid:4) M rhodamine – actin was added by diffusion from the edge . After 10 min , FITC – phalloidin was added in the same way to label all actin filaments . The chamber was sealed , and observations were made after 10 min of incubation at RT . Glass depletion experiment 30 (cid:4) l of brain extract was applied to 70 mg of ground glass coverslip in a mini filtration tube ( 0 . 65 (cid:4) m ; UltraFree - MC ; Millipore ) , and the filtrate was collected by centrifugation twice for 1 min at 11 , 000 g . Depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex Arp2 / 3 complex was depleted from glass - depleted brain extract using a variation of the method described by Egile et al . ( 1999 ) . 15 (cid:4) l of glu - tathione - Sepharose – coupled GST – VCA beads was incubated with 40 (cid:4) l of brain extract for 30 min at 4 (cid:9) C on a rotating wheel . Beads were pelleted at 10 , 000 g for 2 min . Mock depletion is performed by the same amount of glutathione - Sepharose beads . Depletion of the Arp2 / 3 complex was moni - tored by Western blotting of aliquots of extracts and beads . The add - back experiment was performed using the Arp2 / 3 complex purified from bovine brain . For the microscopy assay , we scored the percentage of stars assem - bled on all beads . Quantification of capping protein in cell extracts by Western blotting Different amounts of rat brain and rat embryonic fibroblast extracts were subjected to SDS - PAGE ( 4 – 20 % polyacrylamide ) and immunoblotting with anti - CapZ . The amount of capping protein present was evaluated by com - paring the intensity of the bands of each sample with the chicken CapZ standard by densitometry using NIH image software . We thank Drs . Julie Theriot , Dorothy Schafer , John Cooper , Marie - France Carlier , Josephine Adams , Marion Greaser , and Elena S . Nadezhdina for generous gifts of reagents and bacterial strains . We also thank Dr . Tom Keating and members of the Borisy laboratory for constructive discussions . This work was supported by United States Army USAMRMC grant DAMD 17 - 00 - 1 - 0386 ( D . Vignjevic ) , National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grant GM 62431 ( G . G . Borisy ) , and NIH Glue Grant on Cell Migration IU 54 GM 63126 . Submitted : 12 August 2002 Revised : 24 January 2003 Accepted : 24 January 2003 References Adams , J . C . , J . D . Clelland , G . D . Collett , F . Matsumura , S . Yamashiro , and L . Zhang . 1999 . Cell - matrix adhesions differentially regulate fascin phosphory - lation . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 4177 – 4190 . Bear , J . E . , T . M . Svitkina , M . Krause , D . A . Schafer , J . J . Loureiro , G . A . Strasser , I . V . Maly , O . Y . Chaga , J . A . Cooper , G . G . Borisy , and F . B . Gertler . 2002 . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regu - lates fibroblast motility . Cell . 109 : 509 – 521 . Borisy , G . G . , and T . M . Svitkina . 2000 . Actin machinery : pushing the envelope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 104 – 112 . Cameron , L . A . , M . J . Footer , A . van Oudenaarden , and J . A . Theriot . 1999 . Motil - ity of ActA protein - coated microspheres driven by actin polymerization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 4908 – 4913 . Cameron , L . A . , P . A . Giardini , F . S . Soo , and J . A . Theriot . 2000 . Secrets of actin - based motility revealed by a bacterial pathogen . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 : 110 – 119 . Cameron , L . A . , T . M . Svitkina , D . Vignjevic , J . A . Theriot , and G . G . Borisy . 2001 . Dendritic organization of actin comet tails . Curr . Biol . 11 : 130 – 135 . Cohan , C . S . , E . A . Welnhofer , L . Zhao , F . Matsumura , and S . Yamashiro . 2001 . Role of the actin bundling protein fascin in growth cone morphogenesis : lo - calization in filopodia and lamellipodia . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 48 : 109 – 120 . Cooper , J . A . , and D . A . Schafer . 2000 . Control of actin assembly and disassembly at filament ends . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 97 – 103 . DiNubile , M . J . , L . Cassimeris , M . Joyce , and S . H . Zigmond . 1995 . Actin filament barbed - end capping activity in neutrophil lysates : the role of capping pro - tein - (cid:7) 2 . Mol . Biol . Cell . 6 : 1659 – 1671 . Egile , C . , T . P . Loisel , V . Laurent , R . Li , D . Pantaloni , P . J . Sansonetti , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella flexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bac - terial actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 1319 – 1332 . Evangelista , M . , D . Pruyne , D . C . Amberg , C . Boone , and A . Bretscher . 2002 . Formins direct Arp2 / 3 - independent actin filament assembly to polarize cell growth in yeast . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 32 – 41 . Goldberg , M . B . 2001 . Actin - based motility of intracellular microbial pathogens . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 65 : 595 – 626 ( table of contents ) . Higgs , H . N . , and T . D . Pollard . 2001 . Regulation of actin filament network forma - tion through ARP2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 : 649 – 676 . Huang , M . , C . Yang , D . A . Schafer , J . A . Cooper , H . N . Higgs , and S . H . Zigmond . 1999 . Cdc42 - induced actin filaments are protected from capping protein . Curr . Biol . 9 : 979 – 982 . Isambert , H . , P . Venier , A . C . Maggs , A . Fattoum , R . Kassab , D . Pantaloni , and M . F . Carlier . 1995 . Flexibility of actin filaments derived from thermal fluc - tuations . Effect of bound nucleotide , phalloidin , and muscle regulatory pro - teins . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 11437 – 11444 . Jockusch , B . M . , and G . Isenberg . 1982 . Vinculin and (cid:6) - actinin : interaction with actin and effect on microfilament network formation . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 46 : 613 – 623 . Kureishy , N . , V . Sapountzi , S . Prag , N . Anilkumar , and J . C . Adams . 2002 . Fas - cins , and their roles in cell structure and function . Bioessays . 24 : 350 – 361 . Langanger , G . , J . de Mey , M . Moeremans , G . Daneels , M . de Brabander , and J . V . Small . 1984 . Ultrastructural localization of (cid:6) - actinin and filamin in cultured cells with the immunogold staining ( IGS ) method . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 1324 – 1334 . Lanier , L . M . , M . A . Gates , W . Witke , A . S . Menzies , A . M . Wehman , J . D . Macklis , D . Kwiatkowski , P . Soriano , and F . B . Gertler . 1999 . Mena is required for neurulation and commissure formation . Neuron . 22 : 313 – 325 . Laurent , V . , T . P . Loisel , B . Harbeck , A . Wehman , L . Grobe , B . M . Jockusch , J . Wehland , F . B . Gertler , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Role of proteins of the Ena / VASP family in actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 144 : 1245 – 1258 . Lewis , A . K . , and P . C . Bridgman . 1992 . Nerve growth cone lamellipodia contain Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 962 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 6 , 2003 two populations of actin filaments that differ in organization and polarity . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1219 – 1243 . Li , Z . , E . S . Kim , and E . L . Bearer . 2002 . Arp2 / 3 complex is required for actin poly - merization during platelet shape change . Blood . 99 : 4466 – 4474 . Loisel , T . P . , R . Boujemaa , D . Pantaloni , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature . 401 : 613 – 616 ( see comments ) . Machesky , L . M . , and R . H . Insall . 1998 . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 : 1347 – 1356 . Millard , T . H . , B . Behrendt , S . Launay , K . Futterer , and L . M . Machesky . 2003 . Identification and characterisation of a novel human isoform of Arp2 / 3 complex subunit p16 - ARC / ARPC5 . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 54 : 81 – 90 . Mallavarapu , A . , and T . Mitchison . 1999 . Regulated actin cytoskeleton assembly at filopodium tips controls their extension and retraction . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 1097 – 1106 . Miki , H . , T . Sasaki , Y . Takai , and T . Takenawa . 1998 . Induction of filopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Na - ture . 391 : 93 – 96 . Mullins , R . D . , J . A . Heuser , and T . D . Pollard . 1998 . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and for - mation of branching networks of filaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 95 : 6181 – 6186 . Murray , A . W . 1991 . Cell cycle extracts . Methods Cell Biol . 36 : 581 – 605 . Ono , S . , Y . Yamakita , S . Yamashiro , P . T . Matsudaira , J . R . Gnarra , T . Obinata , and F . Matsumura . 1997 . Identification of an actin binding region and a protein kinase C phosphorylation site on human fascin . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 2527 – 2533 . Palmgren , S . , P . J . Ojala , M . A . Wear , J . A . Cooper , and P . Lappalainen . 2001 . In - teractions with PIP2 , ADP - actin monomers , and capping protein regulate the activity and localization of yeast twinfilin . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 251 – 260 . Pantaloni , D . , R . Boujemaa , D . Didry , P . Gounon , and M . F . Carlier . 2000 . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches filament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 385 – 391 . Pruyne , D . , M . Evangelista , C . Yang , E . Bi , S . Zigmond , A . Bretscher , and C . Boone . 2002 . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science . 297 : 612 – 615 . Rottner , K . , B . Behrendt , J . V . Small , and J . Wehland . 1999 . VASP dynamics dur - ing lamellipodia protrusion . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 321 – 322 . Sagot , I . , S . K . Klee , and D . Pellman . 2002a . Yeast formins regulate cell polarity by controlling the assembly of actin cables . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 42 – 50 . Sagot , I . , A . A . Rodal , J . Moseley , B . L . Goode , and D . Pellman . 2002b . An actin nu - cleation mechanism mediated by Bni1 and profilin . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 626 – 631 . Saoudi , Y . , R . Fotedar , A . Abrieu , M . Doree , J . Wehland , R . L . Margolis , and D . Job . 1998 . Stepwise reconstitution of interphase microtubule dynamics in permeabilized cells and comparison to dynamic mechanisms in intact cells . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 1519 – 1532 . Small , J . V . , G . Isenberg , and J . E . Celis . 1978 . Polarity of actin at the leading edge of cultured cells . Nature . 272 : 638 – 639 . Small , J . V . , M . Herzog , M . Haner , and U . Abei . 1994 . Visualization of actin fila - ments in keratocyte lamellipodia : negative staining compared with freeze - drying . J . Struct . Biol . 113 : 135 – 141 . Small , J . V . , T . Stradal , E . Vignal , and K . Rottner . 2002 . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 : 112 – 120 . Soeno , Y . , H . Abe , S . Kimura , K . Maruyama , and T . Obinata . 1998 . Generation of functional (cid:7) - actinin ( CapZ ) in an E . coli expression system . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 19 : 639 – 646 . Spudich , J . A . , and S . Watt . 1971 . The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contrac - tion . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic fragments of myosin . J . Biol . Chem . 246 : 4866 – 4871 . Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . 1998 . Correlative light and electron microscopy of the cytoskeleton of cultured cells . Methods Enzymol . 298 : 570 – 592 . Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . 1999 . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament ar - ray in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1009 – 1026 . Svitkina , T . M . , A . B . Verkhovsky , K . M . McQuade , and G . G . Borisy . 1997 . Analy - sis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 : 397 – 415 . Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova E . A . , Chaga O . Y . , Vignjevic D . , Kojima S . , Vasiliev J . M . , and Borisy G . G . 2003 . Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorgani - zation of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 : 409 – 421 . Theriot , J . A . , J . Rosenblatt , D . A . Portnoy , P . J . Goldschmidt - Clermont , and T . J . Mitchison . 1994 . Involvement of profilin in the actin - based motility of L . monocytogenes in cells and in cell - free extracts . Cell . 76 : 505 – 517 . Yamashiro , S . , Y . Yamakita , S . Ono , and F . Matsumura . 1998 . Fascin , an actin - bundling protein , induces membrane protrusions and increases cell motility of epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 : 993 – 1006 . Yamashiro - Matsumura , S . , and F . Matsumura . 1985 . Purification and character - ization of an F - actin - bundling 55 - kilodalton protein from HeLa cells . J . Biol . Chem . 260 : 5087 – 5097 . Yarar , D . , W . To , A . Abo , and M . D . Welch . 1999 . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein directs actin - based motility by stimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 9 : 555 – 558 . Zalevsky , J . , L . Lempert , H . Kranitz , and R . D . Mullins . 2001 . Different WASP family proteins stimulate different Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin - nucle - ating activities . Curr . Biol . 11 : 1903 – 1913 .