UbiTtention 2017 : 2nd International Workshop on Smart & Ambient Notiﬁcation and Attention Management Tadashi Okoshi Keio University slash @ ht . sfc . keio . ac . jp Niels Henze VIS , University of Stuttgart niels . henze @ vis . uni - stuttgart . de Anja Exler Karlsruhe Institute of Technology exler @ teco . edu Sven Gehring German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( DFKI ) sven . gehring @ dfki . de Alexandra Voit VIS , University of Stuttgart alexandra . voit @ vis . uni - stuttgart . de Matthias Böhmer TH Köln matthias . boehmer @ th - koeln . de Dominik Weber VIS , University of Stuttgart dominik . weber @ vis . uni - stuttgart . de SeungJun Kim Carnegie Mellon University sjunikim @ cs . cmu . edu Martin Pielot Telefonica Research martin . pielot @ telefonica . com Veljko Pejovic University of Ljubljana Veljko . Pejovic @ fri . uni - lj . si Benjamin Poppinga Smarttention Systems bp @ benjaminpoppinga . de Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . ACM . UbiComp / ISWC’17 Adjunct , September 11 – 15 , 2017 , Maui , HI , USA ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5190 - 4 / 17 / 09 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3123024 . 3124458 Abstract In a world moving towards ubiquitous computing , users are increasingly confronted with a tremendous amount of in - formation proactively provided via notiﬁcations . Today , no - tiﬁcations are generated by a large number of applications and services , through multiple devices and screens in the users’ environment . Thus , human’s attention became a sig - niﬁcant bottleneck . Further , the latest computing trends with emerging new devices including versatile IoT devices , and contexts , such as smart cities and vehicles , further amplify the challenges . For future computing systems , “attention management” , including attention representation , sensing , prediction , analysis and adaptive behavior becomes crucial . Following last year’s successful UbiTtention’16 workshop with more than 40 participants , the UbiTtention 2017 work - shop brings together researchers and practitioners from academy and industry to explore the managements of hu - man attention and notiﬁcations . The workshop considers versatile devices and smart situations to overcome informa - tion overload and overchoice . Author Keywords Notiﬁcations ; Attention Management ; Ambient Interfaces ; Smart Cities ; Internet of Things ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m . [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) ] : Miscellaneous Background In times of an increasing amount of information , human at - tention becomes a bottleneck . Many ubiquitous devices and services therefore proactively seek peoples attention through notiﬁcations : visual , auditory , or tactile alerts in - tended to draw attention to events that took place outside of a user’s focus [ 10 ] . Notiﬁcations are rapidly becoming integral to many ubiquitous computing platforms , such as smartphones , desktop computers , or even cars , and are used by an increasing number of applications and ser - vices [ 28 , 35 ] . Notiﬁcations inform us about new social net - work updates , announce the arrival of new emails , or inform drivers about potential trouble with the car . Research in different contexts has repeatedly shown that notiﬁcations can be distractive , which may cause negative effects on task performance [ 3 , 7 , 10 , 17 , 31 ] . Since noti - ﬁcations in daily life are often created by messengers and social networks [ 6 , 24 , 28 ] , social expectations towards re - sponsiveness create pressure to attend notiﬁcations timely . Thus , disabling notiﬁcations , despite their known disadvan - tages , for many people is not an option [ 10 , 17 ] . Figure 1 : This alarm clock uses ambient light to softly wake up its user . We envision that it could also be used as an helpful output device for other information , e . g . , incoming phone calls or reminders . Yet , it becomes increasingly exhausting to pay attention and respond to all these interruptions in appropriate ways , espe - cially in the advancing ubiquitous computing with emerging ICT - based contexts , such as IoT , smart cities and smart vehicles . As a consequence , users might miss crucial in - formation and become less efﬁcient or , in case of a missed personal message , appear rude [ 25 ] . In addition , the pres - ence of so many different applications and services makes it hard to choose the best and most appropriate one , which can lead to stress and frustration . Eventually , this leads to the problems of information overload and overchoice —in our opinion two of the most relevant problems in information technology for the next few decades . In the era of the Inter - net of Things ( IoT ) we have to handle incoming notiﬁcations from all “our” devices as well as “other” devices . Together with developments in smart city environments or with smart mobility the information overload will grow . Recently , we have been seeing an increase in novel at - tempts to address these problems by using contextual data in order to deliver notiﬁcations at more opportune moments [ 13 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 26 ] , the use of ambient informa - tion presentation ( see Figure 1 ) or using augmentation , or by making it easier to deal with interruptions [ 1 ] . How - ever , there are signiﬁcant challenges still remaining to bring these works together and apply the right strategy in the right moment . UbiTtention 2017 Workshop The workshop brings together participants from industry and academia who are active in attention research , context - aware and ubiquitous computing , as well as ambient and multi - modal interaction . The main objective of UbiTtention 2017 is to share the latest research on user attention and notiﬁcation management in across research areas and con - texts . These areas include HCI , systems research , user studies , IoT , smart cities , smart homes and smart vehi - cles ( as shown in Table 1 ) . Further , the workshop aims to identify future research challenges , research opportunities , and applications of our research outcomes to the society . The workshop is a follow - on from the successful Smart - tention , Please ! workshops at MobileHCI 2015 [ 27 ] 1 and 2016 [ 34 ] 2 , and the UbiTtention [ 33 ] workshop at UbiComp 2016 3 . Last year , the UbiTtention workshop received 16 innovative papers and more than 40 participants on the venue of UbiComp’16 . While the focus of the MobileHCI 1 http : / / mhci15 . smarttention . com / 2 http : / / mhci16 . smarttention . com / 3 https : / / projects . hcilab . org / ubittention / workshops was more on mobile notiﬁcations , in this follow - on workshop we focus on a larger understanding of the dif - ferent roles notiﬁcations can play in a wide variety of com - puting environments including the ofﬁce , the home , in cars , and other smart environments . 1 . Detection / prediction of users’ status around atten - tion and notiﬁcations , such as availability , interruptibility , attentional status and cogni - tive load for interruption 2 . Exchanging / sharing , anal - ysis and feedback on such capability above ( beyond detection and prediction ) 3 . Versatile types of informa - tion presentation method - ologies including ambient , peripheral , distributed and multi - modal presentation 4 . Infrastructures , frameworks and tools for the develop - ment of smart attention systems 5 . Strategies for attention man - agement against emerging computing with IoT devices 6 . Understanding users’ be - havior and habits around notiﬁcations and interrup - tion , including longer term “user engagement” and “behavior change” 7 . Use of ambient representa - tions for “big - data analysis” 8 . Management of information overload in various emerg - ing computing venues such as smart city and smart mobility Table 1 : Non - exclusive overview of workshop topics . Workshop Papers The workshop received a substantial number of submis - sions . After a peer - review process , we accepted 16 sub - missions for presentation at the workshop . The accepted submissions span a broad range of topics . A number of papers aims to develop a deeper understand - ing of the interaction with notiﬁcations . Chen et al . look at the effect of personal relationships on interruptibility [ 5 ] . Mishra et al . investigate contextual cues [ 19 ] and Lander et al . propose to use corneal images to learn more about users’ context [ 15 ] . Kalanadhabhatta et al . are interested in application overchoice and present preliminary results from a longitudinal study [ 12 ] . A number of workshop submissions investigate the per - ception of notiﬁcations . Exler et al . are interested in per - ceptibility of notiﬁcations and the effect of a smartphone’s position [ 8 ] , Mark et al . investigate the effect of blocking distractions [ 16 ] , and Chang et al . take a closer look what happens in the moment a notiﬁcation is perceived [ 4 ] . Sub - missions are also concerned with the way information is presented to the user . Pescara et al . explore tactile feed - back [ 23 ] , Kucera et al . propose a calm display prototype [ 14 ] and Bolton et al . ask if message previews can help to miti - gate interruptions [ 2 ] . Accepted papers also aim to develop models that describe the interaction with notiﬁcations in different ways . Sarker et al . propose an architecture for a system that manages call interruptions [ 29 ] and Tsubouchi & Okoshi describe the analysis of their breakpoint detection model in a large - scale study [ 32 ] . Sarker et al . also propose to get a deeper un - derstanding of mobile users’ behavior using recency - based models [ 30 ] and Ho et al . propose to model engagement for user studies [ 9 ] . Submissions are also concerned with the management of notiﬁcations . Jalaliniya et al . propose sym - biotic attention management in the context of the internet of things [ 11 ] and the work by Mathur & Kawsar propose to work towards cognitive awareness by combining context modeling and notiﬁcations [ 18 ] . Workshop Structure UbiTtention’17 will be held as a full - day workshop , bringing together researchers from industry and academia . After a round of introductions the workshop starts with a series of informative paper presentations . Afterwards , we will have an extensive discussion phase in the afternoon . In this session we will productively dis - cuss several topics , that will be proposed to the participants and identiﬁed by the organizers based on the workshop paper submissions in advance of the workshop . The possi - ble themes include ( but not limited to ) ( 1 ) further signiﬁcant research challenges and opportunities , ( 2 ) possible collabo - rative research theme , and ( 3 ) expected applications on top of our research outputs and deployment to the society . In the discussion session , we will ﬁrst split into small sub - groups , which will be asked to come up with answers and solutions to a speciﬁc agenda . In the end of the workshop , each group is asked to present their ﬁndings , which will then be brieﬂy discussed and summarized . The workshop will conclude with a wrap - up session that summarizes the key discussion points , and which will be used to discuss future collaborations and actions . REFERENCES 1 . Matthias Böhmer , Christian Lander , Sven Gehring , Duncan P . Brumby , and Antonio Krüger . 2014 . Interrupted by a Phone Call : Exploring Designs for Lowering the Impact of Call Notiﬁcations for Smartphone Users . In CHI ’14 . 2 . Frank Bolton , Dov Te’eni , and Eran Toch . 2017 . Do Message Previews help Mitigate Interruptions across Varying Task Load ? . In UbiTtention . 3 . Jelmer P . Borst , Niels A . Taatgen , and Hedderik van Rijn . 2015 . What Makes Interruptions Disruptive ? : A Process - Model Account of the Effects of the Problem State Bottleneck on Task Interruption and Resumption . In CHI . 4 . Yung - Ju Chang , Yi - Ju Chung , Yi - Hao Shih , Hsiu - Chi Chang , and Tzu - Hao Lin . 2017 . What Do Smartphone Users Do when They Sense Phone Notiﬁcations ? . In UbiTtention . 5 . Kuan - Yin Chen , Hao - Ping Lee , and Lin Chih - Heng . 2017 . Who Matters : A Closer Look at Interpersonal Relationship in Mobile Interruptibility . In UbiTtention . 6 . Karen Church and Rodrigo de Oliveira . 2013 . What’s Up with Whatsapp ? : Comparing Mobile Instant Messaging Behaviors with Traditional SMS . In MobileHCI . 7 . Mary Czerwinski , Eric Horvitz , and Susan Wilhite . 2004 . A Diary Study of Task Switching and Interruptions . In CHI . 8 . Anja Exler , Nadim Hammoud , Christian Dinse , Steffen Mattes , Günes Zeynep , and Michael Beigl . 2017 . Investigating The Perceptibility of Different Notiﬁcation Types on Smartphones Depending on t he Smartphone Position . In UbiTtention . 9 . Bo - Jhang Ho , Bharathan Balaji , Mani Srivastava , and Nima Nikzad . 2017 . Emu : Engagement Modeling for User Studies . In UbiTtention . 10 . Shamsi T . Iqbal and Eric Horvitz . 2010 . Notiﬁcations and Awareness : A Field Study of Alert Usage and Preferences . In CSCW . 11 . Shahram Jalaliniya , Diako Mardanbegi , and Thomas Pederson . 2017 . Symbiotic Attention Management in the Context of Internet of Things . In UbiTtention . 12 . Lakshmi Manasa Kalanadhabhatta , Rahul Majethia , Akhil Mathur , and Fahim Kawsar . 2017 . Application Overchoice : Preliminary Lessons from a Longitudinal Study . In UbiTtention . 13 . Yasumasa Kobayashi , Takahiro Tanaka , Kazuaki Aoki , and Kinya Fujita . 2015 . Automatic Delivery Timing Control of Incoming Email Based on User Interruptibility . In CHI EA . 14 . Jan Kucera , James Scott , and Nicholas Chen . 2017 . Probing calmness in applications using a calm display prototype . In UbiTtention . 15 . Christian Lander , Felix Kosmalla , Frederik Wiehr , and Sven Gehring . 2017 . Using Corneal Imaging for Measuring a Human’s Visual Attention . In UbiTtention . 16 . Gloria Mark , Shamsi Iqbal , and Mary Czerwinski . 2017 . How Blocking Distractions Affects Workplace Focus and Productivity . In UbiTtention . 17 . Gloria Mark , Stephen Voida , and Armand Cardello . 2012 . " A Pace Not Dictated by Electrons " : An Empirical Study of Work Without Email . In CHI . 18 . Akhil Mathur and Fahim Kawsar . 2017 . Towards Cognitive Awareness : A Mobile Context Modeling - and Notiﬁcation - based Approach . In UbiTtention . 19 . Varun Mishra , Kelly Caine , Byron Lowens , David Kotz , and Sarah Lord . 2017 . Investigating Contextual Cues as Indicators for EMA Delivery . In UbiTtention . 20 . Tadashi Okoshi , Julian Ramos , Hiroki Nozaki , Jin Nakazawa , Anind K . Dey , and Hideyuki Tokuda . 2015 . Reducing Users’ Perceived Mental Effort Due to Interruptive Notiﬁcations in Multi - device Mobile Environments . In UbiComp . 21 . Tadashi Okoshi , Kota Tsubouchi , Masaya Taji , Takanori Ichikawa , and Hideyuki Tokuda . 2017 . Attention and Engagement - Awareness in the Wild : A Large - Scale Study with Adaptive Notiﬁcations . In PerCom . 22 . Veljko Pejovic and Mirco Musolesi . 2014 . InterruptMe : Designing Intelligent Prompting Mechanisms for Pervasive Applications . In UbiComp . 23 . Erik Pescara , Xueying Yuan , Maximilian Iberl , Alexander Klein , and Ida Rockenbach . 2017 . Exploration of Tactile Feedback in BI & A Dashboards . In UbiTtention . 24 . Martin Pielot , Karen Church , and Rodrigo de Oliveira . 2014 . An In - situ Study of Mobile Phone Notiﬁcations . In MobileHCI . 25 . Martin Pielot and Luz Rello . 2015 . The Do Not Disturb Challenge : A Day Without Notiﬁcations . In CHI EA . 26 . Benjamin Poppinga , Wilko Heuten , and Susanne Boll . 2014 . Sensor - Based Identiﬁcation of Opportune Moments for Triggering Notiﬁcations . Pervasive Computing ( 2014 ) . 27 . Benjamin Poppinga , Martin Pielot , Niels Henze , Nuria Oliver , Karen Church , and Alireza Sahami Shirazi . 2015 . Smarttention , Please ! Intelligent Attention Management on Mobile Devices . In MobileHCI EA . 28 . Alireza Sahami Shirazi , Niels Henze , Tilman Dingler , Martin Pielot , Dominik Weber , and Albrecht Schmidt . 2014 . Large - scale Assessment of Mobile Notiﬁcations . In CHI . 29 . Iqbal H . Sarker , Alan Colman , Muhammad Ashad Kabir , and Jun Han . 2017a . Designing Architecture of a Rule - Based System for Managing Phone Call Interruptions . In UbiTtention . 30 . Iqbal H . Sarker , Alan Colman , Muhammad Ashad Kabir , and Jun Han . 2017b . Understanding Recency - Based Behavior Model for Individual Mobile Phone Users . In UbiTtention . 31 . Cary Stothart , Ainsley Mitchum , and Courtney Yehnert . 2015 . The attentional cost of receiving a cell phone notiﬁcation . Journal of experimental psychology : human perception and performance ( 2015 ) . 32 . Kota Tsubouchi and Tadashi Okoshi . 2017 . People’s Interruptibility in - the - wild : Analysis of Breakpoint Detection Model in a Large - Scale Study . In UbiTtention . 33 . Alexandra Voit , Benjamin Poppinga , Dominik Weber , Matthias Böhmer , Niels Henze , Sven Gehring , Tadashi Okoshi , and Veljko Pejovic . 2016 . UbiTtention : Smart & Ambient Notiﬁcation and Attention Management . In UbiComp Adjunct . 34 . Dominik Weber , Alireza Sahami Shirazi , Sven Gehring , Niels Henze , Benjamin Poppinga , Martin Pielot , and Tadashi Okoshi . 2016a . Smarttention , Please ! : 2nd Workshop on Intelligent Attention Management on Mobile Devices . In MobileHCI EA . 35 . Dominik Weber , Alexandra Voit , Philipp Kratzer , and Niels Henze . 2016b . In - situ Investigation of Notiﬁcations in Multi - device Environments . In Ubicomp .