A Community Emergency Department Rotation for Pediatric Emergency Medicine Fellows Development and Evaluation Melissa L . Langhan , MD , MHS , Seth Woolf , MD , and Gunjan Tiyyagura , MD Objective : There have been increasing job opportunities for pediatric emergency medicine ( PEM ) specialists within community emergency de - partments ( CEDs ) , where 90 % of children receive emergency care . The majority of training for PEM fellows occurs in academic children ' s hospi - tals , which mayexpose fellows todifferentresources thanCEDs . Ourgoals were to develop and to evaluate a CED rotation aimed at improving expo - sure to this care environment for PEM fellows . Methods : Kern ' s 6 steps of curriculum development served as our framework to identify the problem , conduct a needs assessment , develop goals and objectives , formulate an educational strategy , and then plan the implementation and evaluation . Discussion and buy - in among trainees and hospital leadership took place during rotation development . Informal and web - based surveys of PEM fellows and CED attendings evaluated the rotation and assessed participants ' reactions , changes in knowledge , and changes in behavior . Results : TheCEDrotationwaspilotedat1PEMfellowshipprogramover 2 years . Nine PEM fellows participated in the month - long rotation . The majority of participants reported that the rotation goals and objectives were metandthat they acquirednewskillsand rated the CEDrotationasgoodor excellent . Challengestothe CEDrotationincludedlower patientacuityand distance to the CED . Conclusions : A new CED rotation was developed , piloted , and well received by participants . Given the potential differences in practice between tertiarycare children ' s emergency departments andCEDs , aswell asincreas - ing job opportunities in CEDs , program directors should consider incorpo - rating a CED rotation for their PEM fellows . Key Words : training , fellow , community ED ( Pediatr Emer Care 2020 ; 00 : 00 – 00 ) T he training of pediatric emergency medicine ( PEM ) subspecial - ists takes place largely in academic , tertiary , and quaternary care children ' s hospitals . 1 However , 90 % of children present to general emergency departments ( EDs ) within community hospitals . 2 There is varying availability of pediatric - specific subspecialists as well as other resources such as child - life staff , pediatric trained nurses , or pediatric - sized equipment at these community sites , which leads to differences in care . 2 , 3 As this gap in equitable care has been recognized , an increas - ing number of job opportunities have emerged in community EDs ( CEDs ) for PEM physicians . 4 A survey from 2000 to 2005 demonstrated that 9 % of PEM graduates worked in a CED . 5 In reviewing electronic job postings over the last year to a PEM List - serv , more than half of the positions required some or all clinical time to take place at a CED . It is unclear if PEM fellows are ade - quately prepared to practice in a CED . Recent PEM fellows have voiced an interest in more community - based training and expressed interestin these positions ( KramerN , SivasankarS , Ong H . National PEM Fellows Survey , 2019 ) . 6 Among 74 PEM fellowship programs in the United States , only 17 programs provide exposure in a CED . In 25 % of these programs , the CED experience is optional . 6 Overall , there is a paucity of data regarding the development , content , and percep - tions surrounding CED training for PEM fellows . The aim of this study was to develop and evaluate a new CED experience for PEM fellows using Kern ' s 7 6 - step process and Bandura ' s social cognitive theory . 7 , 8 METHODS Prior to 2017 , all ED rotations for the PEM fellows at our in - stitution occurred within the quaternary - care hospital , which has access to all medical and surgical pediatric specialists at all times . Our program trains a total of 7 fellows at a time . Kern ' s 7 6 steps of curriculum development served as a framework for the develop - ment of our CED curriculum . After problem identification and a review of the literature ( described above ) , goals and objectives aligned with the unique experiences available at a CED were es - tablished ( Table 1 ) . The curriculum focused on areas of patient care , consultation , interfacility transfer , and awareness of local re - sources . In contrast to simulation - based curriculum , workshops , or skill expertise , Bandura ' s social cognitive theory was used to frame our curriculum , as the clinical context was felt to be highly relevant to learning and educational achievements . 8 We assumed that fellows would learn best how to incorporate new skills into practice when they observed and modeled behaviors in a CED . Our educational strategy focused on the development of a clinical rotation in a CED with the presence of PEM trained staff and bi - directional learning opportunities such as bedside teaching , dis - cussion of patient cases , and review of relevant literature . While specific didactics were not formalized for this rotation , CED physi - ciansand community - based perspectiveson patient carewere incor - porated into the standing PEM fellows ' educational conferences . Program development and implementation involved discus - sion and coordination with ED leaders , PEM fellows , and adminis - trative staff . Of 36 CEDs in Connecticut in 2017 , 3 employed PEM physicians . A fourth site began staffing PEM physicians in 2018 . In 2017 , the initial site for this new curriculum was chosen based on a preexisting relationship with PEM faculty and the site ' s affiliation within the same health network . This site was 46 miles from the main campus and cared for 8000 children annually . Second - and third - year fellows were assigned a 1 - month rotation at the site and worked a similar allotment of clinical shifts as to their main PED rotations ( eg , twelve 8 - hour shifts ) . Unlike at the home institution , From the Departments of Pediatrics and Emergency Medicine , Section of Pedi - atric Emergency , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT . Disclosure : The authors declare no conflict of interest . This publication was made possible in part by funds to G . T . from CTSA grant KL2 TR001862 from the National Center for Advancing Translational Science , a component of the National Institutes of Health . Reprints : Melissa L . Langhan , MD MHS , Departments of Pediatrics and Emergency Medicine , Section of Pediatric Emergency Medicine , Yale University School of Medicine , 100 York St , Suite 1D , New Haven , CT 06510 ( e ‐ mail : Melissa . Langhan @ yale . edu ) . Copyright © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . ISSN : 0749 - 5161 O RIGINAL A RTICLE Pediatric Emergency Care (cid:129) Volume 00 , Number 00 , Month 2020 www . pec - online . com 1 there were no overnight shifts assigned during this rotation . During these shifts at each community site , they could be supervised by both PEM and emergency medicine ( EM ) attendings and care for both pediatric and adult patients . After feedback concerning distance and effectiveness of the rotation at site 1 in 2017 ( Table 2 ) , a new site was explored in 2018 . While there was a second CED within the same health net - work , because of concerns over the potential impact on EM resi - dent learning , an out - of - hospital network location was chosen as the second clinical site . This site was 21 miles from the main cam - pus , evaluated 17 , 000 children annually , and was a level II trauma center . In order to better inform career choices and based on feed - back from the fellows who already completed the rotation , the rota - tion was now assigned to first - and second - year PEM fellows . The CED took the place of a 1 - month rotation in the PED and an elec - tive block generally used for research . To evaluate the program , the New World Kirkpatrick model was used as a framework . Participants ' reactions ( level 1 ) , change in knowledge ( level 2 ) , and change in behavior ( level 3 ) were assessed . 9 During informal monthly and formal biannual program evaluation meetings , the fellowship directors and the fellows discussed the fellowship curriculum , including the new CED TABLE 1 . Participant Perception of Accomplishment of Rotation Goals and Objectives Goals and Objectives Respondent Completely Met Partially Met Did Not Meet Acquire the necessary knowledge and skills to completely manage the most complex cases in a community setting Fellow site 1 * 1 ( 25 % ) 2 ( 50 % ) 1 ( 25 % ) Fellow site 2 3 ( 60 % ) 2 ( 40 % ) 0 Attending 3 ( 100 % ) 0 0 Gain independence in developing the initial evaluation and treatment plan of patients Fellow site 1 2 ( 50 % ) 1 ( 25 % ) 1 ( 25 % ) Fellow site 2 5 ( 100 % ) 0 0 Attending 3 ( 100 % ) 0 0 Stabilize patients with non – life - threatening conditions Fellow site 1 1 ( 25 % ) 2 ( 50 % ) 1 ( 25 % ) Fellow site 2 3 ( 60 % ) 2 ( 40 % ) 0 Attending 3 ( 100 % ) 0 0 Coordinate care with consultants and referring primary care physicians Fellow site 1 3 ( 75 % ) 1 ( 25 % ) 0 Fellow site 2 3 ( 60 % ) 2 ( 40 % ) 0 Attending 3 ( 100 % ) 0 0 Initiate appropriate transfer of patients after stabilization Fellow 9 ( 100 % ) 0 0 Attending 3 ( 100 % ) 0 0 Understand the modes of transfer available to patients and determine the mode of transfer appropriate for the underlying medical problem Fellow site 1 2 ( 50 % ) 2 ( 50 % ) 0 Fellow site 2 5 ( 100 % ) 0 0 Attending 3 ( 100 % ) 0 0 Have awareness of the resources available at the community site and nearby hospitals when coordinating interfacility transfers Fellow site 1 2 ( 50 % ) 1 ( 25 % ) 1 ( 25 % ) Fellow site 2 5 ( 100 % ) 0 0 Attending 3 ( 100 % ) 0 0 * Fellow site 1 , n = 4 ; fellow site 2 , n = 5 . TABLE 2 . Reported Skills Acquisition , Benefits , and Challenges Skills Acquisition Benefits Challenges Coordination of care • Determining appropriate facility for admission • Arranging interfacility transfers • Interacting with off - site consultants Community setting • Gain perspective about community - based care • Gain experience and understanding working in hospital with limited resources • Understanding of different attending positions in pediatric emergency medicine Systems issues • Orienting to new system • Lack of access to electronic medical record • Securing badge access to all areas • Restricted ability of fellows to moonlight Procedures • Fracture reduction • Application of plaster splints • Ultrasound - guided intravenous placement • Hip relocation • Laceration repair • Nasal suctioning Patient care • Autonomy in initiating treatment plan and determining disposition • Gain procedural experience • Gain confidence in patient management • Increased training in adult patient care Patient care • Low patient acuity • Variable autonomy Ancillary tasks • Drawing up medications • Administering medications via intravenous and intranasal routes • Obtaining vital signs ED management • Decision - making regarding interfacility transfer • Increased management of ED flow Geography • Long commute Langhan et al Pediatric Emergency Care (cid:129) Volume 00 , Number 00 , Month 2020 2 www . pec - online . com © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . rotation . To provide a confidential opportunity to provide feed - back on the CED rotation , an electronic survey was developed , piloted , and distributed anonymously to query both the PEM at - tendings working in the CEDs and PEM fellows about their experi - ences . Descriptive and qualitative data are reported . This study was granted exemption by the institutional review board . RESULTS There were 9 eligible fellows ; 100 % participated in the CED rotation . Four PEM fellows and 2 PEM attendings participated in the CED rotation during 2017 . In 2018 , 5 fellows and 3 PEM at - tendings participated at site 2 . We obtained data from 9 fellows ( 100 % ) and 3 attendings ; 2 attendings provided individual ratings from site 1 , and 1 attending provided a consensus rating aftergroup discussion from site 2 . The majority of fellows and attendings felt that the goals and objectives of this rotation were completely met , with lower fellow ratings generally occurring at site 1 ( Table 1 ) . Fellows reported that they were able to practice autonomously on all shifts ( 67 % ) , most shifts ( 22 % ) , and some shifts ( 11 % ) ; the 3 respondents who answered “ most ” and “ some ” shifts were all from site 1 . Similarly , 67 % of fellows felt that they altered their typical practice in the CED during all or most shifts because of the differ - ences in resources , and 44 % felt their perception about community - based EM changed . Fellows reported by free text on new skills acquisition , rotation benefits , and challenges ( Table 2 ) . Fellows also described teaching CED staff members through both bedside opportunities and discussions during some of their shifts on a variety of topics including pediatric vital signs to the management of febrile infants . There were no reports of deficits in other experiences that were replaced by the CED during the evaluation meetings . The overall rating of the rotation was excel - lent or good for 78 % of fellows and 100 % of attendings . Among the 4 fellows who completed this rotation and have attending posi - tions , 2 ( 50 % ) spend 60 % to 70 % of their time working in a CED . Among the 4 fellowswho are still in training , 1 will most likely con - sider and 3 may or may not consider attending positions in a CED . DISCUSSION Through partnership with community physicians and leaders , a new curriculum for PEM fellows to enhance their understanding and experiences caring for children in a CED was implemented . This is the first study to assess PEM fellows ' and attendings ' percep - tions about training in a CED . As with any new initiative , frequent feedback and openness to change are key factors to success . Based on our survey responses and the career choices of our graduates , this addition to the curriculum seems to represent a valuable ex - perience in preparing trainees for their future jobs . Learners are active agents in their own learning , which is influenced by their experiences , values , goals , and also by the environment in which the learning takes place . 8 It is critical to understand the learner ' s perspective on any educational intervention so that we can itera - tively improve the intervention and maximize its value for the learner . Our fellows reported acquiring avariety of new skills and de - scribed many benefits to this rotation . There was overall positive feedback from the attendings in the CED regarding the presence of PEM fellows . These findings may refute the feeling of fellow - ship directors who are unsure if a CED rotation may be a valuable experience . 6 Several of the challenges reported were addressed by relocating to a new site , which represents a more radical change ; other more minor concerns were addressed through administrative assistance alone . Although this curriculum has been developed and piloted at only 1 institution with a small number of fellows , it creates a framework for other programs to follow . The CED curriculum will continue at our training site , and we will disseminate information and mentor other program directors who are interested in creating a similar rotation . As with simulation and ultrasound , new curricula will continue to be incorporated into PEM training in order to ad - dress the ever - changing face of EM . Limitations This pilot project was implemented in a single PEM fellow - ship program with a limited number of trainees . The fellowship had an increase in complement during this time ; thus , coverage at our institution was not affected . Availability of CEDs with suf - ficient pediatric volume and enthusiastic educators may be limited within the geographic area surrounding other programs . Longitudi - nal follow - up with trainees may help to determine if the newrotation influenced career placement and ease of transition when working in a CED setting . Eligible senior fellows ( eg , those not on a work visa and in good standing ) could voluntarily moonlight at other CEDs within the limits of duty - hour restrictions ; however , moonlighting was not permitted at rotation sites . Although several fellows did pur - sue moonlighting opportunities , this rotation allowed all fellows the ability to experience practice in a CED . Finally , as we did not measure fellows ' perceptions about practice in the CED or inten - tion towork in a CED prior to this study , the magnitude and direc - tion of change of their perceptions and future job intentions are unclear . CONCLUSIONS The implemented CED rotation for PEM fellows was a valu - able addition to the training program and provided both clinical learning opportunities and career insights . Program directors should consider similar rotations within their training programs . REFERENCES 1 . Mittiga MR , Nagler J , Eldridge CD , et al . Essentials of pediatric emergency medicine fellowship : part 3 : clinical education and experience . Pediatr Emerg Care . 2016 ; 32 : 479 – 485 . 2 . Bourgeois FT , Shannon MW . Emergency care for children in pediatric and general emergency departments . Pediatr Emerg Care . 2007 ; 23 : 94 – 102 . 3 . ChimeNO , KatznelsonJ , Gangadharan S , etal . Comparingpracticepatterns between pediatric and general emergency medicine physicians : a scoping review . Pediatr Emerg Care . 2017 ; 33 : 278 – 286 . 4 . Merritt C , Dietrich AM , Bogie AL , et al . 2018 Academic Emergency MedicineConsensus Conference : aworkforcedevelopmentresearchagenda for pediatric care in the emergency department . Acad Emerg Med . 2019 ; 26 : 1063 – 1073 . 5 . VuTT , HampersLC , JosephMM , etal . Jobmarketsurveyofrecentpediatric emergency medicine fellowship graduates . Pediatr Emerg Care . 2007 ; 23 : 304 – 307 . 6 . MarcheseRF , GalaPK , SeidenJA , etal . Clinicalexperienceinacommunity setting during pediatric emergency medicine fellowship training . Pediatr Emerg Care . 2017 . 7 . Kern D , Thomas P , Hughes M . Curriculum Development for Medical Education : A Six - Step Approach . 2nd ed . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins University Press ; 2009 . 8 . Zackoff MW , Real FJ , Abramson EL , et al . Enhancing educational scholarship through conceptual frameworks : a challenge and roadmap for medical educators . Acad Pediatr . 2019 ; 19 : 135 – 141 . 9 . Kirkpatrick D , Kirkpatrick J . Evaluating Training Programs : The Four Levels . 3rd ed . San Francisco , CA : Berrett - Koehler Publishers ; 2006 . Pediatric Emergency Care (cid:129) Volume 00 , Number 00 , Month 2020 Community ED Rotation for PEM Fellows © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . www . pec - online . com 3