Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA Vol . 95 , pp . 8975 – 8980 , July 1998 Neurobiology Geometric and viscous components of the tortuosity of the extracellular space in the brain ( diffusion y volume transmission y viscosity y extrasynaptic signaling y spillover ) D MITRI A . R USAKOV * AND D IMITRI M . K ULLMANN †‡ * Division of Neurophysiology , National Institute for Medical Research , The Ridgeway , Mill Hill , London NW7 1AA , United Kingdom ; and † University Department of Clinical Neurology , Institute of Neurology , Queen Square , London WC1N 3BG , United Kingdom Edited by Charles F . Stevens , The Salk Institute for Biological Studies , La Jolla , CA , and approved May 18 , 1998 ( received for review April 10 , 1998 ) ABSTRACT To understand the function of neuro - active molecules , it is necessary to know how far they can diffuse in the brain . Experimental measurements show that substances confined to the extracellular space diffuse more slowly than in free solution . The diffusion coefficients in the two situations are commonly related by a tortuosity factor , which represents the increase in path length in a porous medium approximating the brain tissue . Thus far , it has not been clear what compo - nent of tortuosity is due to cellular obstacles and what component represents interactions with the extracellular me - dium ( ‘‘geometric’’ and ‘‘viscous’’ tortuosity , respectively ) . We show that the geometric tortuosity of any random assembly of space - filling obstacles has a unique value ( ’ 1 . 40 for radial flux and ’ 1 . 57 for linear flux ) irrespective of their size and shape , as long as their surfaces have no preferred orientation . We also argue that the Stokes – Einstein law is likely to be violated in the extracellular medium . For molecules whose size is comparable with the extracellular cleft , the predominant effect is the viscous drag of the cell walls . For small diffusing particles , in contrast , macromolecular obstacles in the extra - cellular space retard diffusion . The main parameters relating the diffusion coefficient within the extracellular medium to that in free solution are the intercellular gap width and the volume fraction occupied by macromolecules . The upper limit of tortuosity for small molecules predicted by this theory is ’ 2 . 2 ( implying a diffusion coefficient approximately five times lower than that in a free medium ) . The results provide a quantitative framework to estimate the diffusion of mole - cules ranging in size from Ca 2 1 ions to neurotrophins . Signaling between neurons in the brain takes place principally via the passive movement of substances in the extracellular space . A quantitative description of extracellular diffusion is therefore of central importance to understand both conven - tional ‘‘fast’’ amino acid neurotransmission , and more diffuse forms of chemical transmission as exemplified by monoamin - ergic and peptidergic signaling ( 1 , 2 , 3 ) . The distinction between these modes of intercellular communication is in fact blurred by reports that the fast transmitters glutamate and g - aminobutyric acid also may act at receptors outside the synaptic cleft where they are released ( 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ) . The role of extracellular diffusion is not confined to chem - ical transmission : if extracellular diffusion of Ca 2 1 ions is slow , they may become locally depleted in the vicinity of foci of neuronal activity , thereby modifying synaptic efficacy ( 9 , 10 ) . All of the above phenomena also are linked intimately with pathological processes : changes in extracellular diffusivity have been described in the very early stages of cerebral ischemia , both with diffusion - weighted magnetic resonance imaging ( 11 , 12 ) and with electrochemical measurements of inorganic ions injected into the extracellular space ( 13 , 14 , 15 ) . These changes , which are likely to play a major role in neurotoxicity and seizure initiation , again underline the need for a comprehensive description of extracellular diffusion . In spite of the fundamental role of extracellular diffusion , its properties are incompletely understood . Nicholson and col - leagues ( 16 ) made an important advance by introducing a robust approximation approach , which considers diffusion in brain tissue as occurring within a porous medium . Assuming that cell membranes are relatively impermeable , Fick’s laws of diffusion apply to such a medium , provided that two additional parameters are accounted for : the extracellular volume frac - tion a and the tortuosity l ( 17 ) . The latter parameter repre - sents the ‘‘porous - to - free’’ increase in the path length of diffusing particles , which lowers the apparent diffusion coef - ficient by a factor 1 y l 2 . The values of a and l have hitherto been estimated in various brain areas by comparing the concentration profiles of dyes or inorganic ions injected into the brain with the corre - sponding solutions of diffusion equations ( 16 , 18 , 19 , 20 ) . Simultaneous measurements of a and l also have been re - ported in the same tissue in the face of alterations in osmo - larity , either by direct manipulation of the perfusion medium in vitro ( 21 ) or secondary to ischemia in vivo ( 13 , 15 ) . These experiments show that changes in a and l are anticorrelated , although a quantitative explanation of this relationship is lacking . It is also unclear which component of the measured tortuosity arises from the tissue geometry alone ( a component termed ‘‘geometric tortuosity’’ in this study ) , and which is due to nonelastic interaction of the diffusing molecules with cell walls and extracellular macromolecules ( the ‘‘viscosity com - ponent’’ of tortuosity ) . This knowledge is however of critical importance , both to relate diffusion to tissue morphology and to gain a fuller understanding of the phenomena that deter - mine the movement of molecules between cells . We have demonstrated recently that the geometric tortuos - ity of the neuropil can be estimated by applying principles of integral geometry ( 22 ) . Here , we show that the geometric tortuosity has a unique value if the tissue area of interest is homogeneous and isotropic . We further show that two impor - tant principles together determine the viscosity component of tortuosity . For small diffusing molecules , extracellular macro - molecules can be considered as obstacles , which impose an additional increase in path length , analogous to the geometric obstacles formed by cells themselves . For larger diffusing molecules , comparable in size to the intercellular gaps , the rate of movement down the concentration gradient is further reduced , mainly because of viscous interactions with cell walls . The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment . This article must therefore be hereby marked ‘‘ advertisement ’’ in accordance with 18 U . S . C . § 1734 solely to indicate this fact . © 1998 by The National Academy of Sciences 0027 - 8424 y 98 y 958975 - 6 $ 2 . 00 y 0 PNAS is available online at http : yy www . pnas . org . This paper was submitted directly ( Track II ) to the Proceedings office . ‡ To whom reprint requests should be addressed . e - mail : dkullman @ ion . ucl . ac . uk . 8975 We demonstrate consistency between the predictions derived from this treatment of viscosity and published experimental data , implying that it can be applied to derive quantitative predictions of the spatio - temporal extent of movement of molecules in the brain . RESULTS Infinitesimal Approximation . The porous medium approx - imation ( 16 ) implies that the extracellular space in brain tissue represents a continuous system of narrow , interconnected intercellular gaps ( roughly equivalent to the soap phase in soap foam ) , as depicted schematically in Fig . 1 A . First , we shall estimate the geometric tortuosity of such a medium , that is the porous - to - free path length increase of diffusing particles . We shall analyze the path of these particles within the extracellular space by considering the elementary path segments within a thin ( thickness dx ) and narrow ( width dy ) rectangular prism ‘‘probe’’ normal to OX , the direction of the general diffusion gradient ( Fig . 1 A ) . If the intercellular gaps are much smaller than the obstacles to diffusion , this probe cuts out a thin extracellular space fragment approximated by a parallelogram K as shown in Fig . 1 B . The angular position of K in Euclidian space is determined by a pair of angles , b 1 and b 2 ( see Fig . 1 B ) . The flowing particles cross the slab along an ‘‘optimal’’ path PQ 5 dq that lies on K , whereas in a free medium the particles would be simply translated along the segment dx . The direction of path dq is determined by the vector N normal to the surface K and the concentration gradient ‘‘driving force’’ f parallel to OX , which acts upon the particles ( from thermodynamic principles , f 5 1 N A ›m i › x , where N A 5 6 . 02 3 10 23 mol 2 1 is Avogadro’s number and m i is the partial molal Gibbs free energy , a quantity proportional to concentration ) . Two other forces act on the particles but do not affect the direction of dq : a Brownian stochastic force , whose time - and - space average equals zero , and friction or viscosity , which is antiparallel to the particle velocity vector . Thus , the direction of the path dq is defined by the intercept of K and a plane containing N and f ( see Fig . 1 B ) . Geometric principles give the relationship : dq y dx 5 ~ 1 1 cos 2 b 1 z tan 2 b 2 ) 1 y 2 . [ 1 ] Because dq is the particle path in the porous medium and dx would be the particle path in a free medium , the ratio dq y dx represents the ‘‘elementary geometric tortuosity’’ . Eq . 1 pro - vides an elementary basis to estimate the mean tortuosity factor that retards diffusion throughout the entire medium . This factor is slightly different , depending on whether it is calculated with respect to unidirectional or radial diffusion flow , as shown below . Mean Geometric Tortuosity : Unidirectional Flux . We shall begin by considering unidirectional flux ( ref . 23 , pp . 273 – 281 ) in which the net movement of diffusing particles is in the direction OX and the average flux in directions OY or OZ equals zero ( Fig . 1 A ) . In physiological terms , this scenario occurs , for instance , when the diffusion source or sink is a planar surface of brain tissue . It also applies to the movement of water molecules that is detected by diffusion - weighted magnetic resonance imaging . The infinitesimal approximation illustrated in Fig . 1 B allows estima - tion of the mean tortuosity l x by averaging the elementary geometrictortuosityacrossmanythinslabsnormaltotheaxis OX , the direction of diffusion . In other words , l x is determined by the mean ^ dq y dx & with respect to the complete set of parallel thin slabs , of which one is depicted in Fig . 1 B . Therefore , to estimate l x from Eq . 1 , it is sufficient to determine the joint probability density of b 1 and b 2 in such a set ( the joint probability density is required because orthogonal sections of arbitrary surfaces may not be statistically independent , ref . 24 ) . Also note that in conditionsofsteady - statediffusion , thisderivationisindependent of surface concavity . If the medium is isotropic ( see Discussion for the case of an anisotropic medium ) , the vectors N normal to the elementary cell surface fragments ( Fig . 1 B ) must point in any direction in space with equal probability . In other words , if we relate the occurrence of each such direction to the length of the corre - sponding vector N , the vector vertices will form the sphere illustrated in Fig . 2 A . This sphere , defined by x 2 1 y 2 1 z 2 5 r 2 ( where r is the arbitrary radius ) , thus represents the prob - ability density function of the orientation of elementary cell surface fragments such as K . Therefore , sampling of fragments K in an isotropic medium is equivalent to the sampling of K on the spherical surface illustrated in Fig . 2 A . The Euclidean coordinates ( x , y , z ) and angles b 1 and b 2 ( see Fig . 2 A ) for each fragment K , resulting from the intersection of a thin slab and the sphere , are related as cos b 1 5 z z ~ y 2 1 z 2 ! 2 1 y 2 [ 2a ] tan b 2 5 x y z . [ 2b ] F IG . 1 . Diagram illustrating derivation of the elementary geomet - ric tortuosity of a porous medium . ( A ) A schematic diagram of a porous medium fragment with a thin and narrow rectangular prism probe situated perpendicular to the direction of diffusion f . The expanded section shows the relationship of extracellular and intracel - lular spaces ( ECS and ICS , respectively ) . ( B ) Geometry of the infinitesimal approximation : the thin and narrow probe cuts a paral - lelogram K out of the extracellular space ( between two cell surfaces ) ; a diffusing particle encounters the probe at point P and then travels on surface K along path dq 5 PQ ; the spatial position of K is determined by angles b 1 and b 2 ( shown ) . F IG . 2 . ( A ) Sphere representing the probability density function of the directions of the vectors N ( see Fig . 1 B ) normal to the elementary surface fragments K , in the case of an isotropic medium . The position of a fragment K sampled on the sphere is determined by angles b 1 and b 2 . ( B ) Theoretical profile of the velocity of particles flowing between parallel cell walls . The profile corresponds to Eqs . 7 – 9 and applies for large diffusing molecules . 8976 Neurobiology : Rusakov and Kullmann Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 ( 1998 ) Combining Eqs . 1 and 2 gives dq y dx 5 ~ 1 - x 2 y r 2 ! 2 1 y 2 . [ 3 ] Eq . 3 allows , after a few elementary transformations , the averaging integral for l x over all slabs normal to OX ( Fig . 1 B ) in the form l x 5 E 0 r dx ˛ r 2 2 x 2 . [ 4 ] This integral is convergent and yields l x 5 p y 2 > 1 . 571 , which therefore estimates the mean geometric tortuosity in the case of unidirectional diffusion flow through an isotropic medium . Mean Geometric Tortuosity : Radial Flux . Radial diffusion is more commonly encountered in considering intercellular signaling and arises , for instance , when a vesicle of neuro - transmitter is released within a small volume of tissue . In contrast to unidirectional diffusion , the mean tortuosity l r with respect to radial diffusion can be estimated by averaging the elementary geometric tortuosity over the complete set of thin slabs ( see Fig . 1 A ) sampled in all possible directions with uniform probability . This estimate can be achieved as follows . First , Eq . 3 is transformed into spherical coordinates dq y dr 5 ~ 1 - sin 2 u z cos 2 w ! 2 1 y 2 . [ 5 ] And second , this expression is averaged over angles 0 , u , p and 0 , w , 2 p , using a Monte Carlo experiment where u and w are distributed uniformly over their domains . This simula - tion experiment ( sample size n 5 10 , 000 ) gave the mean tortuosity for radial diffusion : l r > 1 . 398 . Nongeometric Component of Tortuosity : Viscosity . In a viscous medium , the fundamental Stokes – Einstein law relates the diffusion coefficient D to the effective radius of the diffusing molecules R , and the viscosity of the medium h : D 5 kT 6 ph R , [ 6a ] where T is temperature and k 5 1 . 38 3 10 2 23 J y K is Boltz - mann’s constant . If the aqueous medium also contains large particles , its viscosity h is given by h h 0 5 1 1 2 . 5 f1 f ~ f ! , [ 6b ] where f is the volume fraction occupied by the large particles , h 0 is the viscosity of the aqueous phase ( without these parti - cles ) , and f ( f ) is a term which represents deviations of the law to particular nonideal systems . However , relationships 6a and 6b cannot be applied generally to the extracellular medium because they require two conditions to be met . First , the diffusing molecules must be much smaller than the medium dimensions ( intercellular gap width ) , so that their interaction with the stationary cell walls is negligible . This condition may be met for small ion species and most neurotransmitters whose effective dimensions in the aqueous solution are smaller than ’ 1 nm . The situation is different for larger molecules such as neurotrophins and other polypeptides . In this case , according to the classic theory of viscosity , the predominant phenome - non is likely to be stationary wall drag . Wall drag affects the flux velocity v at different distances z from the stationary surface according to a fundamental formula dv dz 5 v R [ 7 ] ( where the hydrodynamic radius R also stands for the width of an elementary layer in the flux ) . If molecules flow between two approximately parallel surfaces ( cell walls ) spaced at a distance d apart , the boundary conditions for Eq . 7 are : v ( 0 ) 5 v ( d ) 5 0 and v ( z 3 ‘ , d 3 ‘ ) 5 V free , where V free is the flux velocity unconstrained by the wall drag ( i . e . , in a free medium ) . Integration leads to an expression v 5 V free ~ 1 1 e 2 d R 2 e 2 z R 2 e 2 d 2 z R ! , [ 8 ] which suggests that the profile of the flux velocity v ( z ) between two parallel cell walls follows a superimposition of two expo - nents , as depicted in Fig . 2 B . Averaging v over the intercellular gap width d by using Eq . 8 yields the mean velocity ^ v & of the molecules flowing between the walls ^ v & V free 5 1 1 e 2 d R 2 2 R d ~ 1 2 e 2 d R ! . [ 9 ] An important feature of Eq . 9 is that the ratio ^ v & V free , in accordance with Fick’s 1st law , is equivalent to the ratio between the diffusion coefficient in the extracellular space and that in a free medium , D y D free . Eq . 9 also indicates that the effect of the stationary wall drag becomes negligible whenever R , , d : for instance , when r 5 0 . 05 d , D 5 0 . 9 D free . The second fundamental requirement for the Stokes – Einstein relationship 6 to hold is that the diffusing molecules must be much larger than the molecules that constitute the medium ( 25 ) . This is likely to be violated in the extracellular space of the brain because it contains large macromolecules loosely attached to the cell walls . A more likely scenario is that , although the viscosity h of such a medium may increase rapidly with the volume fraction occupied by these large particles ( in agreement with Einstein’s law or its extended versions , as illustrated by Eq . 6b ( 26 ) , the diffusivity of relatively small molecules in the medium remains much less affected ( 27 ) . The accurate liquid mechanics description of such systems is com - plicated because of the difficulty of treating ‘‘hydrodynamic tortuosity’’ ( 27 ) and accounting for the obstruction effect of large , slowly moving particles ( 25 ) . Bearing in mind the latter comment , we attempt an alter - native approach . Classically , the viscous interactions between the diffusing particles and layers of the medium are treated while assuming a nonslip boundary condition ( see Eq . 7 ) . Instead , we treat extracellular macromolecules ( and the water molecules that they bind ) as random obstacles that impose an additional path increase ( 28 ) . We postulate that small diffusing molecules flow in the medium with a constant rate whereas the viscous drag phenomena in the vicinity of the macromolecules are simply reflected by the effective size ( volume ) of these obstacles . Denote an additional tortuosity factor arising in this system as l * . Because there is only one preferred direction of diffusion within each infinitesimal fragment of the extracellu - lar space ( see Fig . 1 B ) , l * should be calculated with respect to unidirectional flux . Denote also as f the tissue volume fraction of the extracellular obstacles to diffusion ( macromolecules constituting the extracellular matrix ) . If these obstacles occupy almost the entire extracellular volume ( f 5 a ) , l * 5 l x > 1 . 57 . When f , a , a ‘‘typical’’ molecule encounters no obstacles within the extracellular space ( that is , l * § 1 ) for a f y a portion of its path . The other ( 1 2 f y a ) portion of the path corre - sponds to a situation analogous that shown in Fig . 1 B . Given the probabilistic nature of mean l * , the value of l * ( f ) can then be estimated by using a Bayesian probability formula : l * ~ f ! 5 l x 3 f a1 S 1 2 f a D 5 1 1 0 . 57 3 f a . [ 10 ] Neurobiology : Rusakov and Kullmann Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 ( 1998 ) 8977 Dissecting Geometric and Nongeometric Tortuosity of the Extracellular Space . Given the technical difficulties of mea - suring the diffusivity of the extracellular medium , an obvious question arises : how valid ( and useful ) are the above theoret - ical considerations regarding extracellular diffusion in real brain tissue ? To relate our derivations to existing experimental observations , let us assign all viscosity phenomena to a particle path increase factor l * , which is additional to the factor l r caused by the geometric tortuosity alone , that is , l 5 l r l * . The apparent extracellular diffusion coefficient D ap measured in brain tissue will therefore combine the effects of geometric tortuosity and viscosity , so that D ap 5 D free ( l r l * ) 2 2 . Depend - ing on whether the diffusing molecules are relatively large or small , the main contribution to the value of l * will be determined by Eq . 9 or 10 , respectively . Nicholson and Tao ( 29 , 30 ) analyzed the diffusion of dex - trans of different molecular weight in rat cortical slices by using an optical method . The data , showing a positive relation between l and the estimated Stokes radii of the dextrans , R , are replotted in Fig . 3 A . Assuming d > 20 nm ( the average distance between adjacent cell membranes , as typically observed in electron micrographs of cortical neuropil ) , Eq . 9 yields the relationship shown by the dotted line . Given that there are no adjustable parameters in the theory , the agreement between the theoretical prediction and the data is surprisingly close . Similarly , both Eqs . 9 and 10 predict that D ap should be positively correlated with the extracellular volume fraction a ( or mean intermembrane distance d ) , as long as there is no change in f . A manipulation of a that satisfies this condition is redistribution of water between the intracellular and extra - cellular compartments , obtained either directly by manipulat - ing the ionic composition ( and thus osmolarity ) of the per - fusing medium or indirectly by inducing tissue ischemia . In this case , f is the only free parameter , which can be estimated by fitting Eq . 10 to the available experimental observations on the diffusion of small molecules . Fig . 3 B shows data from the rat cortex ( 13 , 15 ) ( combined data shown ) and the turtle cerebel - lum ( 21 ) , where l was estimated by monitoring the extracel - lular diffusion of tetramethylammonium ( TMA 1 ) ions . Eq . 10 provides a reasonable fit in both cases , giving values of f > 0 . 07 for the turtle cerebellum and f > 0 . 04 for the rat cortex ( i . e . , extracellular molecules effectively occupy a smaller fraction of the tissue volume in the rat cortex ) . Finally , our theory predicts that , for molecules much smaller than the intercellular gaps , the upper limit of the combined tortuosity l is l r l x > 2 . 2 ( see Eq . 10 when f 3 a ) . This value is not exceeded in any of the experimental measurements of TMA 1 diffusion ( 13 , 15 , 21 , 31 ) . Because the activation of glutamate receptors depends steeply on the effective diffusion coefficient ( 22 ) , these results place constraints on the extent to which extrasynaptic receptors can be opened following exocy - tosis . DISCUSSION We have shown that the geometric tortuosity of an isotropic medium composed of space - filling obstacles has a unique value , ’ 1 . 57 for unidirectional flux and 1 . 40 for radial flux . This result implies that , if the brain parenchyma is genuinely isotropic , deviations in l from these values arise not from changes in tissue geometry but from the nongeometric , or viscosity , component of total tortuosity . Indeed , all the avail - able estimates of l , which is generally measured for radial flux , are in excess of 1 . 40 , implying that the viscosity component is not negligible . Tortuosity for Unidirectional and Radial Flux . Crank ( 23 ) and others have cautioned against extrapolating from detailed geometric treatments of unidirectional flux in heterogeneous media to other patterns of diffusion ( ref . 23 , p . 273 ) . Never - theless , a distinction between l x and l r , that is , between the tortuosity for unidirectional and radial flux , has not previously been made explicitly . The observation that the effective cu - mulative increase in path length caused by an arbitrary obsta - cle is generally greater for unidirectional than for radial flux can be illustrated by the following two - dimensional example . Consider a particle moving down a unidirectional concentra - tion gradient ( Fig . 4 ) . In the absence of obstacles , it will cross successive iso - density contours , represented by parallel straight lines normal to the trajectory of the particle . However , when the particle’s movement is restricted to a narrow ‘‘pore’’ ( at an arbitrary angle u with respect to the concentration F IG . 3 . ( A ) Comparison of theoretical estimates and experimental data relating the combined tortuosity l to the effective radius of diffusing molecules . Circles , experimental estimates of the extracel - lular tortuosity in the rat cortex for four different dextrans ( Stokes radii R are shown on the abscissa ) by Tao and Nicholson ( 29 , 30 ) . Dashed line , theoretical prediction based on Eq . 9 with no adjustable parameters . ( B ) Comparison of theoretical estimates and experimen - tal data relating the combined tortuosity l to the extracellular volume fraction a . Filled circles , experimental estimates of a and l measured with TMA 1 diffusion in the turtle cerebellum by Krizaj et al . ( 21 ) , perfused with solutions of different osmolarities . Open circles , esti - mates of a and l obtained in the rat neocortex by Pe´rez - Pinzo´n et al . ( 13 ) and Vorˇı´sˇek and Sykova´ ( 15 ) in conditions of induced ischemia ( combined data ) . Curves , corresponding theoretical estimates of l ( a ) , in accordance with Eq . 10 with one adjustable parameter , f , the volume fraction occupied by large extracellular macromolecules . F IG . 4 . Difference between tortuosity for unidirectional and radial flux . A particle at A , flowing down its concentration gradient ( hori - zontal dotted arrow ) , is confined to an intercellular pore . In the case of unidirectional flux , it reaches the next iso - density contour ( vertical dotted line ) at C . In the absence of obstacles , it would have reached the next contour at B . The ratio of path length AC y AB , equivalent to 1 y cos u , averaged over space , is thus equivalent to l x , the tortuosity for unidirectional flux . If , however , the diffusion flux is radial , originating from a point source at O , the particle only needs to travel as far as D to reach the next isodensity contour ( circular dotted lines ) . The tortuosity for radial flux l r , is thus given by averaging the ratio AD y AB over space . Because AC . AD , it follows that l x . l r . 8978 Neurobiology : Rusakov and Kullmann Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 ( 1998 ) gradient ) , it will have to travel further than in a free medium ( by a factor 1 y cos u ) to reach the next iso - density contour . In the case of radial diffusion , the iso - density contours are concentric circles , and the particle again travels further to reach the next contour , which is however always closer than for unidirectional flux ( see Fig . 4 ) . Because tortuosity is simply the average increase in path length for many such obstacles , it follows that l x ( tortuosity for unidirectional flux ) is greater than l r ( tortuosity for radial flux ) . Anisotropic Diffusion . A potential limitation on the present conclusions is the assumption that the brain is isotropic . Indeed , Nicholson , Sykova´ and coworkers ( 15 , 32 , 33 ) have shown that the neuropil in some areas of the brain does exhibit minor degrees of anisotropy with respect to tortuosity . These measurements were obtained on a scale of 100 m m or more and do not necessarily preclude the occurrence of local isotropy at a smaller scale ( for instance , intersynaptic distances ) . Never - theless , it is important to establish whether the present analysis can be extended to the more general , anisotropic case . Al - though there is no general definition for an anisotropic medium , it can be conveniently introduced through the geo - metric formalism depicted in Fig . 2 A . This can be used to relate the anisotropy of a medium with space - filling cells to a nonuniform spatial orientation of normal vectors N that determine the angular positions of elementary surface frag - ments . One natural example of such anisotropy is when the tissue can be considered as an initially isotropic medium stretched y compressed in one or two directions . In this case , the vertices of N form not a probability density sphere as depicted in Fig . 2 A , but a three - axis ellipsoid . For an ellipsoid deter - mined by x 2 y a 2 1 y 2 y b 2 1 z 2 y c 2 5 1 ( where a , b , and c are the three ellipsoid axes ) , the expression for local tortuosity , anal - ogous to Eq . 3 , takes the form : dq dx 5 ˛ 1 1 b 4 c 4 x 2 a 4 ~ c 4 y 2 1 b 4 z 2 ! where z 2 5 c 2 2 x 2 a 2 2 y 2 b 2 . [ 11 ] Eq . 11 allows estimation of the mean tortuosity l x with respect to uni - directional diffusion along OX by using Monte Carlo averaging , where x and y are uniformly distributed within intervals [ 0 , a [ and [ 0 , b [ , respectively . The estimated values of l x are shown in Table 1 for several characteristic ratios a : b : c . Note that the notion of ‘‘mean’’ tortuosity with respect to radial diffusion in this case is ambiguous because diffusion in an anisotropic medium occurs with different velocities in different directions . A potential source of error in our approach is that estimates of l from Eqs . 5 and 11 rely on Monte Carlo sampling experiments . This method was chosen because the explicit averaging integrals , although being finite by definition , showed unsatisfactory numerical convergence in the vicinity of singu - larities ( data not shown ) . The numerical error that arises in our Monte Carlo simulations was assessed by the variation between the estimates obtained with different sample sizes , ranging from 5 , 000 to 15 , 000 . This variation falls within 6 2 – 5 % of the mean estimated value . Mechanisms of Viscosity . We have argued that two different viscosity mechanisms contribute to the diffusion phenomena in the extracellular medium depending on whether the diffus - ing molecules are relatively large ( Eq . 9 ) or small ( Eq . 10 ) . The distinction between these two mechanisms is , of course , some - what artificial because molecules do not fall into two separate size classes . In addition , the diffusion of proteins with complex shapes and surface charge distributions may be affected by nonviscous interactions with extracellular receptors and other matrix molecules . The present derivations of the viscosity component of tortuosity should therefore be seen as the basis for further refinements . Nevertheless , the treatment of wall drag interactions with dextrans of different sizes does give a reasonable agreement with the data of Nicholson and Tao ( 29 , 30 ) as depicted in Fig . 3 A . Indeed , because the smaller dextrans encounter both viscosity mechanisms ( wall drag and macro - molecular obstacles ) , the discrepancy between the experimen - tal fit and theoretical prediction may be even smaller than indicated . We have argued that the retardation of extracellular diffu - sion due to viscosity is largely determined by the parameters f , d , and a , rather than following the classic Stokes – Einstein theory . Although d and a can be estimated from electron micrographs ( 22 ) , there does not appear to be a direct exper - imental approach to verify our predictions regarding f , which represents the extracellular volume fraction occupied by large macromolecules ( Fig . 3 B ) . However , the prediction that the combined tortuosity l is increased by extracellular macromol - ecules has been recently supported by experimental observa - tions of Sykova´ and coworkers ( 34 ) : high molecular weight dextrans added to the perfusate caused large increases in l , monitored in the isolated rat spinal cord by the diffusion of TMA 1 . These results also can be used to compare the Stokes – Einstein theory ( Eq . 6a ) and the Bayesian approximation ( Eq . 10 ) . To test the applicability of the Stokes – Einstein law , we examined the effect of different dextran concentrations on the viscosity of the perfusate by using a falling ball viscometer ( Gilmont , Barrington , IL ) . The results , related to the baseline value obtained for standard artificial cerebrospinal fluid ( ACSF ) , were then used to derive an estimate of the relative diffusion coefficient ( Eq . 6a ) , and consequently apparent tortuosity l in the presence of dextrans . For the Bayesian description ( Eq . 10 ) , we referred to data from Tao and Nicholson ( 30 ) : the hydrodynamic radii of both 40 kDa and 70 kDa dextran were reported to be ’ 8 nm , implying that , in a 1 % solution , the macromolecules occupy ’ 20 % of the volume . Under baseline conditions in the rat central nervous system , l > 1 . 57 ( ref . 34 ) , implying f y a > 0 . 22 ( Fig . 3 B ) . Eq . 10 can then be applied to predict the effect of adding specified concen - trations of dextrans on f and therefore l . The outcome of the two alternative models is shown in Table 2 , which indicates that the Stokes – Einstein description ( Eq . 6a ) yields a larger devi - ation from the experimental data than the Bayesian descrip - tion ( Eq . 10 ) . This implies that the effect of large , slowly moving obstacles on the extracellular diffusion of small mol - ecules , as described above , cannot be ignored . An important aspect of the above considerations is that local narrowing of the intercellular gaps may significantly retard the diffusing flux in a supra - linear manner , whatever the size of the diffusing molecules . This phenomenon is reminiscent of the distinction between ‘‘local’’ and ‘‘global’’ viscosity observed in aqueous solutions containing large biological molecules ( 26 , 27 ) . It is therefore important to bear structural inhomogene - ities in mind in considering diffusion on a small scale , for instance in the vicinity of a synapse . Table 1 . Estimated values of the mean geometric tortuosity , l x , of a porous medium with different degrees of anisotropy of cell surfaces , characterized by the axes a , b , and c Anisotropy axis ratio , a : b : c Estimated tortuosity , l x 1 : 1 : 1 * 1 . 56 1 : 1 : 2 † 1 . 49 1 : 2 : 1 † 1 . 39 1 : 2 : 2 1 . 76 2 : 1 : 1 1 . 09 2 : 2 : 1 †† 1 . 13 2 : 1 : 2 †† 1 . 17 p , Spherical surface : the Monte Carlo assessment is consistent with the analytical solution , giving l x 5 p y 2 ( see Results ) . Axis ratios markedwithsimilarsymbols ( †or†† ) representgeometricallyidentical cases with respect to the direction of diffusion ( differences in l x reflect the precision limit of the Monte Carlo simulations ; see Discussion ) . Neurobiology : Rusakov and Kullmann Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 ( 1998 ) 8979 Apart from the geometric and viscous components of tor - tuosity , another phenomenon that affects the movement of neuroactive substances in the brain is the interaction of diffusing molecules with receptors , transporters and other binding sites . Although this interaction is beyond the scope of this paper , it can , under certain conditions , be treated as a buffering process that scales the diffusion coefficient in an analogous manner to tortuosity ( 22 ) . CONCLUSION The present study separates tortuosity into two distinct com - ponents , geometric and viscosity . The finding that , for an isotropic porous medium , there is a unique value for geometric tortuosity is at first sight difficult to reconcile with the obser - vation that osmotic perturbations , among other treatments , can have profound effects on the apparent diffusion path length . This paradox can however be fully explained by changes in viscosity arising from alterations in the distance between cell membranes and in the density of macromolecular obstacles . The approach outlined here allows a quantitative insight into the constraints on the movement of neuro - active substances in the extracellular medium and sheds light on the consequences of the early changes in extracellular space that accompany cerebral ischemia and other neuropathological states . We are grateful to E . Sykova´ for sharing unpublished data and to A . Fine and G . Barker for valuable comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by the Medical Research Council and the Bio - technology and Biological Sciences Research Council . 1 . Agnati L . F . , Zoli , M . , Stromberg , I . & Fuxe , K . ( 1995 ) Neuro - science 69 , 711 – 726 . 2 . Zoli , M . & Agnati , L . F . ( 1996 ) Prog . Neurobiol . 49 , 363 – 380 . 3 . Bach - y - Rita , P . ( 1996 ) Neuroscientist 2 , 260 – 261 . 4 . Faber , D . S . & Korn , H . ( 1988 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 85 , 8708 – 8712 . 5 . Isaacson , J . S . , Solis , J . & Nicoll , R . A . ( 1993 ) Neuron 10 , 165 – 175 . 6 . Barbour B . & Ha¨usser , M . ( 1997 ) Trends Neurosci . 20 , 377 – 384 . 7 . Kullmann , D . M . & Asztely , F . ( 1998 ) Trends Neurosci . 21 , 8 – 14 . 8 . Scanziani , M . , Salin , P . A . , Vogt , K . E . , Malenka , R . C . & Nicoll , R . A . ( 1997 ) Nature ( London ) 385 , 630 – 634 . 9 . Montague , P . R . ( 1996 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 3619 – 3623 . 10 . Rusakov , D . A . , Harrison , E . & Stewart , M . G . ( 1998 ) Neuro - pharmacol . 37 , 513 – 521 . 11 . Mintorovich , J . , Mosely , M . E . , Chileuitt , L . , Shimizu , H . , Cohen , Y . & Weinstein , P . R . ( 1991 ) Magn . Reson . Med . 18 , 39 – 50 . 12 . Minematsu , K . , Li , L . , Fisher , M . , Sotak , C . H . , Davis , M . A . & Fiandaca , M . S . ( 1992 ) Neurology 42 , 235 – 240 . 13 . Pe´rez - Pinzo´n , M . A . , Tao , L . & Nicholson , C . ( 1995 ) J . Neuro - physiol . 74 , 565 – 573 . 14 . Sykova´ , E . ( 1997 ) Neuroscientist 3 , 28 – 41 . 15 . Vorˇı´sˇek , I . & Sykova´ , E . ( 1997 ) J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . 17 , 191 – 203 . 16 . Nicholson , C . , Phillips , J . M . & Gardner - Medwin , A . R . ( 1979 ) Brain Res . 169 , 580 – 584 . 17 . Lehner , F . K . ( 1979 ) Chem . Eng . Sci . 34 , 821 – 825 . 18 . Nicholson , C . & Phillips , J . M . ( 1981 ) J . Physiol . 321 , 225 – 257 . 19 . McBain , C . J . , Traynelis , S . F . & Dingledine , R . ( 1990 ) Science 249 , 674 – 677 . 20 . Nicholson , C . ( 1993 ) J . Neurosci . Methods 48 , 199 – 213 . 21 . Krizaj , D . , Rice , M . E . , Wardle , R . A . & Nicholson , C . ( 1996 ) J . Physiol . 492 , 887 – 896 . 22 . Rusakov , D . A . & Kullmann , D . M . ( 1998 ) J . Neurosci . 18 , 3158 – 3170 . 23 . Crank , J . ( 1975 ) The Mathematics of Diffusion ( Clarendon , Oxford ) . 24 . Rusakov , D . A . ( 1993 ) Biometrics 49 , 141 – 149 . 25 . Lamanna , R . , Delmelle , M . & Cannistraro , S . ( 1994 ) Phys . Rev . E Stat . Phys . Plasmas Fluids Relat . Interdiscip . Top . 49 , 5878 – 5880 . 26 . Choy , T . C . ( 1995 ) Physica A ( Amsterdam ) 221 , 263 – 276 . 27 . Yam , K . L . , Anderson , D . K . & Buxbaum , R . E . ( 1988 ) Science 241 , 330 – 332 . 28 . Clark , M . E . , Burnell , E . E . , Chapman , N . R . & Hinke , J . A . M . ( 1982 ) Biophys . J . 39 , 289 – 299 . 29 . Nicholson , C . & Tao , L . ( 1993 ) Biophys . J . 65 , 2277 – 2290 . 30 . Tao , L . & Nicholson , C . ( 1996 ) Neuroscience 75 , 839 – 847 . 31 . Van der Toorn , A . , Sykova´ , E . , Dijkhuizen , R . M . , Vorˇı´sˇek , I . , Vargova´ , L . , Sˇkobisova´ , E . , van Lookeren Campagne , M . , Reese , T . & Nicolay , K . ( 1996 ) Mag . Reson . Med . 36 , 52 – 60 . 32 . Rice , M . E . , Okada , Y . C . & Nicholson , C . ( 1993 ) J . Neurophysiol . 70 , 2035 – 2044 . 33 . Mazel , T . , Sˇimonova´ , Z . & Sykova´ , E . ( 1998 ) NeuroReport 9 , 1299 – 1304 . 34 . Prokopova´ , S . , Nicholson , C . & Sykova´ , E . ( 1996 ) Physiol . Res . 45 , 28 . Table 2 . Comparison of experimental data and theoretical predictions for the effect of exogenous extracellular macromolecules ( dextrans ) on the tortuosity factor l Prefusatemedium Experimentaldata * Bayesian approximation , ( Eq . 10 ) Stokes – Einstein prediction , ( Eq . 6 ) l f y a l h , mPas l ACSF 1 . 57 0 . 22 ( 1 . 57 ) 1 . 05 ( 1 . 57 ) 1 1 % 70 kDa 1 . 75 0 . 38 1 . 70 1 . 47 1 . 85 1 2 % 70 kDa 1 . 72 0 . 54 1 . 83 1 . 70 2 . 00 1 2 % 40 kDa 1 . 77 0 . 54 1 . 83 1 . 47 1 . 85 * Data from Prokopova´ et al ( 34 ) : Left column , artificial cerebro - spinal fluid ( ACSF ) with various concentrations of 40 or 70 kDa dextran ; f y a , volume fraction of large molecules ( including dextrans ) in the extracellular space ; h , viscosity of perfusate measured in mPas . 8980 Neurobiology : Rusakov and Kullmann Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 ( 1998 )