Research electronic data capture ( REDCap ) —A metadata - driven methodology and workﬂow process for providing translational research informatics support Paul A . Harris a , * , Robert Taylor b , Robert Thielke c , Jonathon Payne d , Nathaniel Gonzalez e , Jose G . Conde e a Department of Biomedical Informatics , Vanderbilt University , 2525 West End Avenue , Suite 674 , Nashville , TN 37212 , USA b Ofﬁce of Research Informatics , Vanderbilt University , 2525 West End Avenue , Suite 600 , Nashville , TN 37212 , USA c General Clinical Research Center , Medical College of Wisconsin , 9200 West Wisconsin Avenue , Milwaukee , WI 53226 , USA d Biomedical Research Education and Training , Vanderbilt University , 340 Light Hall , Nashville , TN 37232 , USA e Center for Information Architecture in Research , University of Puerto Rico , P . O . Box 365067 , San Juan , PR 00936 , USA a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 3 July 2008 Available online 30 September 2008 Keywords : Medical informatics Electronic data capture Clinical research Translational research a b s t r a c t Research electronic data capture ( REDCap ) is a novel workﬂow methodology and software solution designed for rapid development and deployment of electronic data capture tools to support clinical and translational research . We present : ( 1 ) a brief description of the REDCap metadata - driven software toolset ; ( 2 ) detail concerning the capture and use of study - related metadata from scientiﬁc research teams ; ( 3 ) measures of impact for REDCap ; ( 4 ) details concerning a consortium network of domestic and international institutions collaborating on the project ; and ( 5 ) strengths and limitations of the RED - Cap system . REDCap is currently supporting 286 translational research projects in a growing collaborative network including 27 active partner institutions . (cid:2) 2008 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction TheR01fundingmechanismmaybethecornerstoneofAmerica’s biomedicalresearchprogram , butindividualscientistsoftenrequire informatics and other multidisciplinary team expertise that cannot easily be obtained or developed in the independent research envi - ronment [ 1 ] . The National Center for Research Resources has stated that the future of biomedical research will involve collaborations by manyscientistsindiverselocationslinkedthroughhigh - speedcom - puternetworksthatenablesubmission , analysis , andsharingofdata [ 2 ] . However , the need to collect and share data in a secure manner with numerous collaborators across academic departments or even institutions is a formidable challenge . This manuscript presents a metadata - driven software application and novel metadata - gather - ing workﬂow used to successfully support translational research projects in the academic research environment . REDCap ( Research Electronic Data Capture ) was initially developed and deployed at Vanderbilt University , but now has collaborative support from a wide consortium of domestic and international partners . 2 . Methods The REDCap project was developed to provide scientiﬁc research teams intuitive and reusable tools for collecting , storing and disseminating project - speciﬁc clinical and translational research data . The following key features were identiﬁed as critical components for supporting research projects : ( 1 ) collaborative access to data across academic departments and institutions ; ( 2 ) user authentication and role - based security ; ( 3 ) intuitive elec - tronic case report forms ( CRFs ) ; ( 4 ) real - time data validation , integrity checks and other mechanisms for ensuring data quality ( e . g . double - data entry options ) ; ( 5 ) data attribution and audit capabilities ; ( 6 ) protocol document storage and sharing ; ( 7 ) central data storage and backups ; ( 8 ) data export functions for common statistical packages ; and ( 9 ) data import functions to facilitate bulk import of data from other systems . Given the quantity and diver - sity of research projects within academic medical centers , we also determined two additional critical features for the REDCap project : ( 10 ) a software generation cycle sufﬁciently fast to accommodate multiple concurrent projects without the need for custom pro - ject - speciﬁc programming ; and ( 11 ) a model capable of meeting disparate data collection needs of projects across a wide array of scientiﬁc disciplines . REDCap accomplishes key functions through use of a single study metadata table referenced by presentation - level operational modules . Based on this abstracted programming model , studies are developed in an efﬁcient manner with little resource investment beyond the creation of a single data dictionary . The concept of metadata - driven application development is well established , so we realized early in the project that the critical factor for success would lie in creating a simple workﬂow methodology allowing re - search teams to autonomously develop study - related metadata in 1532 - 0464 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2008 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbi . 2008 . 08 . 010 * Corresponding author . Fax : + 1 615 936 8545 . E - mail address : paul . harris @ vanderbilt . edu ( P . A . Harris ) . Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 ( 2009 ) 377 – 381 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Biomedical Informatics journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / yjbin an efﬁcient manner [ 3 – 5 ] . In the following sections , we describe the workﬂow process developed for REDCap metadata creation and provide a brief overview of the user interface and underlying architecture . 2 . 1 . Study creation workﬂow Fig . 1 provides a schematic representation of the workﬂow methodology for building a REDCap database for an individual study . The process begins with a request from the research team to the Informatics Core ( IC ) for database services . A meeting is scheduled between the research team and an IC representative for a formal REDCap demonstration . Key program features ( intui - tive user interface , data security model , distributed work environ - ment , data validation procedures , statistical package - ready export features , and audit trail logging ) are stressed during the initial meeting in addition to providing project - speciﬁc data collection strategy consultation . Researchers are given a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet ﬁle providing detailed instructions for completing re - quired metadata information ( e . g . ﬁeld name , end - user label , data type , data range , etc ) about each measurement in each case report form . They are asked to spend time over the next several days working with the spreadsheet template to deﬁne data elements for their speciﬁc project , and then return the worksheet to the IC via electronic mail . The returned worksheet is used to build and populate the study - speciﬁc database tables feeding a working web - based electronic data collection ( EDC ) application for the pro - ject . A web link to the prototype application is given to the re - search team along with instructions for testing and further iteration of the metadata spreadsheet until the study data collec - tion plan is complete . The system is then placed in production sta - tus for study data collection . The workﬂow process typically includes several members of the research group and allows the en - tire team to devise and test every aspect of study data collection requirements before study initiation . 2 . 2 . User interface The REDCap user interface provides an intuitive method to se - curely and accurately input data relating to research studies . Fig . 2 shows a typical CRF view . Each form is accessible only to users who have sufﬁcient access privileges set by the research team . Forms contain ﬁeld - speciﬁc validation code sufﬁcient to en - sure strong data integrity . In addition to checking for mandatory ﬁeld type ( e . g . numeric entry for systolic blood pressure ) , embed - ded functions also check data ranges ( e . g . 70 – 180 mmHg ) and alert the end - user whenever entered data violates speciﬁed limits . Data ﬁelds may be populated using text ﬁelds or through embedded pull - down boxes or radio buttons where the end - user is shown one value and a separate code is stored in the database for later statistical analysis ( e . g . 0 = No , 1 = Yes ) . Clickable project menu items are shown on the right side of the screen in Fig . 2 . All menu items in the Data Entry tab point to CRFs speciﬁc to the scientiﬁc project , while the Applications tab contains menu items pointing to general REDCap functions . Researchers use the ‘‘Data Export Tool” to push collected data out of the REDCap system for external analysis and may select entire forms and / or individual ﬁelds for export . The module returns downloadable raw data ﬁles ( comma - delimited format ) along with syntax script ﬁles used to automatically import data and all context information ( data labels , coded variable information ) into common statistical packages ( SPSS , R / S + , SAS , Stata ) . The ‘‘Data Import Tool” module allows bulk upload of data from existing ﬁles with automatic val - idation of data and audit trail creation similar to those created when using CRF data entry methods . The ‘‘Data Comparison Tool” module provides a mechanism to view and reconcile data for those studies employing double - data entry or blinded - data entry meth - ods . The ‘‘Data Logging” module provides users a view of all data transactions for the duration of the project . The ‘‘File Repository” module allows end - users to store individual supporting ﬁles for the project and retrieve wherever and whenever necessary . The ‘‘Data Dictionary” module allows researchers to download a clean copy of the project metadata during the iterative study data plan - ning process and the ‘‘User Rights” module is used by project administrators to add or remove research personnel and set indi - vidual security rights . 2 . 3 . Architecture The REDCap project uses PHP + JavaScript programming languagesandaMySQLdatabaseenginefordatastorageandmanip - ulation [ 6 , 7 ] . Hardware and software requirements are modest and Initial Meeting Rsch Team DefinesMetadata Conversion to REDCap Project StudyDB Tables Test Prototype Production Revision ? NO Requirements Development Prototype Testing Deployment Research Team Research Team Informatics Team Informatics + Research Team YES Fig . 1 . REDCap Project Initiation Workﬂow : Study - speciﬁc databases are created using data dictionaries provided by the research team . After an initial demonstration , researchteams use acustom MS - Excelﬁle templateto provide projectmetadata . Theinformaticsteamuses thisﬁleto createaprototype web applicationthat researchers can test while revising their data dictionary . Once consensus is reached by the research team on the entire data collection CRF package , the application is moved to production status for study initiation . 378 P . A . Harris et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 ( 2009 ) 377 – 381 the system runs in Windows / IIS and Linux / Apache web server envi - ronments . In keeping with the goal of creating a rapid development methodology and easily maintainable resource for multiple concur - rent studies , we devised a set of similar database tables for use in eachstudy . ThestandardREDCapprojectrequiresﬁvedistincttables storedinasingleMySQLdatabase : ( 1 ) aMETADATAtablecontaining all study data pertaining to database storage ( data ﬁeld types and naming used for automatic creation of separate data storage table ) and CRF presentation ( form names and security levels , ﬁeld - speciﬁc display and validation rules ) ; ( 2 ) a LOGGING table used to store all information about data changes and exports ; ( 3 ) a DOCS table used to store uploaded ( ex . consent forms , analysis code ) or generated export ﬁles ( SAS , SPSS , R , Stata , Excel ) ; ( 4 ) a RIGHTS table containing speciﬁcresearcherrightsandexpirationsettings ; and ( 5 ) aﬂatDATA table used to store all collected data for the study ( one row per sub - ject with all collected data ﬁelds stored in columns ) . In studies requiring greater than 1500 data ﬁelds per subject , multiple DATA tables are used with a 1 : 1 relationship between tables linked on the subject identiﬁer ﬁeld . Although simplistic , this data model is easy to reproduce and tailor for individual research studies during theprojectcreationprocessandhasprovenadequateforawidevari - etyofclinicalandtranslationalresearchstudiesseeninmultipleaca - demic research environments . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Research utilization The ﬁrst REDCap project was placed in production at Vanderbilt University in August , 2004 . REDCap was successfully deployed and gained a wide reputation within the institution as a toolset and workﬂow for providing secure , web - based data collection services . Informatics investment has varied during the time of operation , but has typically not exceeded one person performing new module development work , supporting investigators and working with project consortium partners . Fig . 3 shows activity for the REDCap project at Vanderbilt Uni - versity and our CTSA partner institution , Meharry Medical College , from August , 2004 through September , 2008 . REDCap was initially created to support clinical research studies , but we now also use the project to support basic science and operational databases for our CTSA organization ( e . g . process database for managing REDCap projects , accounting activity for CTSA Community Engagement core ) . The total number of projects is currently 204 ( clinical = 189 ; basic = 7 ; operational = 8 ) , including 156 active projects and 48 projects in prototype ( pre - production ) status . The project creation process may take from less than a day to over a year to move from Fig . 2 . REDCap Data Entry : Case report forms are accessible to users who have sufﬁcient access rights and contain ﬁeld - speciﬁc client - side validation code sufﬁcient to ensure data integrity . In addition to checking for mandatory ﬁeld type ( e . g . numeric entry for systolic blood pressure ) , validity functions also check data ranges ( e . g . 70 – 180 mmHg ) and alert the end - user whenever entered data violates speciﬁed limits . CRF pages and REDCap functional modules are accessible to end users by clicking links on the right - side application menu of each project . P . A . Harris et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 ( 2009 ) 377 – 381 379 prototype to production status and depends entirely on the moti - vation and readiness of the research team in deﬁning CRF require - ments and launching the study . Projects are allowed to remain in prototype status as long as researchers are interested in continuing development . The total subjects in all Vanderbilt and Meharry production - level clinical research study databases currently numbers 17 , 959 and demonstrates active use for the REDCap system in the clinical domain . The number of registered end - users for all clinical , basic and operational projects is currently 722 unique individuals , including 363 users known through audit logs to have actively par - ticipated in data entry or export . An analysis of the number of reg - istered users per project conveys information about the size and diversity of supported studies ( median = 4 , mean = 5 . 1 , range = 1 – 77 ) . An analysis of the number of projects per registered user con - veys information about the diversity of supported users ( med - ian = 1 , mean = 1 . 5 , range = 1 – 14 ) . 3 . 2 . Multi - institutional consortium : software availability and collaborative network In August , 2006 , we launched a pilot initiative to study the pro - cess surrounding developing and sharing research informatics re - sources across academic institutions ( Fig . 4 ) . The REDCap consortium now consists of 27 partners ( 26 domestic , 1 interna - tional ) collaborating on new development and providing support for REDCap operations . Using this consortium approach , we have successfully added new REDCap modules , created documentation and support processes for adopting centers , added language abstraction ( English , Spanish and Japanese versions currently available ) and also regularly deﬁne and reﬁne near - and long - term plans for improvement and added functionality . We provide soft - ware and support at no charge to institutions , but ask for contribu - tions to the overall project through member participation in weekly all - hands meetings and other initiatives . We are encour - aged by progress to date and encourage partnership with other academic institutions who would like to join the project . Informa - tion concerning joining the consortium may be found at the con - sortium public website ( http : / / www . project - redcap . org ) . 4 . Discussion Several factors contribute to REDCap’s successful implementa - tion in the clinical and translational research enterprise . Most important , the need for researcher - controlled data services and secure data collection , storage and export is a universal need for any single - or multi - center research study . The initial REDCap demonstration meeting provides an opportunity for project - spe - ciﬁc informatics consultation concerning data collection and stor - age , data validation procedures , data security and logging requirements , and forms layout . The prototype testing and reﬁne - ment workﬂow process ensures a team - based data deﬁnition strat - egy prior to study initiation , thereby improving the timeliness and overall quality of study data . The startup time required to launch a new project is short and almost entirely determined by researcher input in deﬁning a structured study - speciﬁc data collection plan . After the initial researcher demonstration meeting , IC support for a single project typically requires less than 60 min over the life of a study ( including allowances for mid - study CRF modiﬁcations when necessary ) . The Vanderbilt , University Ofﬁce of Research Informatics offers REDCap services at no charge for scientiﬁc re - search teams and considers the modest personnel investment ( < 0 . 5 FTE for universal training and support ) a sound investment ensuring researchers have ready access to centralized resources compliant with HIPAA best practices . A number of limitations should be recognized with the REDCap project . The ﬂat - table structure used for collected research data is inefﬁcient from a data storage standpoint , but very efﬁcient from the perspective of study setup and ideal for embedded data export procedures . The researcher - led metadata creation process is fast and ﬂexible , but does not encourage the use of data naming stan - dards , with the exception that data dictionary templates are typi - cally reused by researcher teams across studies . We are considering methods for adding standards - based data identiﬁers to the metadata process using IC expert guidance in studies where this approach would add value . 5 . Conclusion The cost of purchasing and supporting major vendor solutions for clinical data management systems can be prohibitive [ 8 ] . Although costs can be justiﬁed in large organizations running multiple sponsored clinical trials , the academic research environ - ment is typically home to many preclinical investigator - initiated research studies requiring a fraction of the subjects needed for lar - ger trials . In these cases , traditional EDC setup time for CRFs and software expense may outweigh beneﬁts for the study [ 9 ] . The REDCap project provides a rapid - development and ﬂexible infor - matics systems - based approach to supporting studies in the translational research enterprise . The project beneﬁts from a Fig . 3 . REDCap Study Utilization at Vanderbilt and Meharry Medical College : Local use of the REDCap project has grown steadily since introduction in August , 2004 at Vanderbilt University and our CTSA partner Meharry Medical College . September 11 , 2008 statistics indicated 204 total projects , including 156 active and 48 in the prototype development process . Projects are allowed to remain in prototype status as long as researchers are interested in continuing development . 380 P . A . Harris et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 ( 2009 ) 377 – 381 consortium of academic institutions and we encourage others to consider joining the group of adopting and collaborating sites . Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge : Jerry Zhao ( Vanderbilt University ) for assistance with Vanderbilt computing resources ; Maricruz Sil - va - Ramos ( University of Miami ) for assistance with data export procedures , Dr . Andrew Cucchiara ( University of Pennsylvania ) and Dale Plummer ( Vanderbilt University ) for consultative assis - tance with biostatistics package syntax procedures ; and the fol - lowing individuals for general participation and leadership within the REDCap consortium enterprise : Mark Oium and Jim VerDuin ( Medical College of Wisconsin ) , Robert Schuff , Hannah Howard , David Brown , and Ethan Seifert ( Oregon Health Sciences University ) , Ronald Sanders and Lori Sloane ( University of New Mexico ) , Jessie Lee , Elizabeth Wood and Jihad Obeid ( Cornell Uni - versity ) , Brenda Nieves ( University of Puerto Rico ) , Michael Lin and Rob Pawluk ( Mayo Clinic ) , Judith Hartman ( University of Pitts - burgh ) , Sheree Hemphill ( Case Western Reserve University ) , Alex - andre Peshansky ( University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey ) , Mitsuhiro Isozaki ( Tokai University ) , Adrian Nida , Bernie Caraviello , and Matthew Gregg ( Medical University of South Caro - lina ) , Knut Wittkowski ( The Rockefeller University ) , Joseph Wu ( University of California , Irvine ) , Tim Morris and Neeta Shenvi ( Emory University ) , Liz Chen ( Harbor - UCLA Medical Center ) , Charles Lu and Pradeep Mutalik ( Yale University ) , Thomas McKib - ben ( Northwestern University ) , Kent Anderson and Ayan Patel ( University of California , Davis ) , Clarence Potter ( University of North Carolina ) , Joshua Franklin and Jim Brinkley ( University of Washington ) , Bernie LaSalle ( University of Utah ) , Ted Kalbﬂeisch ( University of Louisville ) , Todd Ferris , Tanya Podchiyska and Gomathi Krishnan ( Stanford University ) , and Fatima Barnes ( Meharry Medical College ) . This work was supported by NCRR grants 5M01 - RR00095 , G12RR03051 , 5M01RR000058 - 45 , and 1 UL1 RR024975 from NCRR / NIH . References [ 1 ] Zerhouni EA . A new vision for the national institutes of health . J Biomed Biotechnol 2003 ; 2003 ( 3 ) : 159 – 60 . [ 2 ] US Department of Health and Human Services NIoHNCfRR . 2004 - 2008 Strategic Plan : Challenges and Critical Choices . NIH Publication No . 04 - 5480 . 1 - 1 - 2004 . Ref Type : Report . [ 3 ] Nadkarni PM , Cheung KH . SQLGEN : a framework for rapid client - server database application development . Comput Biomed Res 1995 ; 28 ( 6 ) : 479 – 99 . [ 4 ] Nadkarni PM , Brandt CM , Marenco L . WebEAV : automatic metadata - driven generation of web interfaces to entity - attribute - value databases . J Am Med Inform Assoc 2000 ; 7 ( 4 ) : 343 – 56 . [ 5 ] Fraternali P , Paolini P . Model - driven development of Web applications : the AutoWeb system . ACM Trans Inf Syst 2000 ; 18 ( 4 ) : 323 – 82 . [ 6 ] PHP Hypertext Preprocessor . http : / / www . php . net / . 2007 . Ref Type : Electronic Citation . [ 7 ] MySQL Database Engine . http : / / www . mysql . com / . 2007 . Ref Type : Electronic Citation . [ 8 ] Zubatch M . Value of Hosted Clinical Data Environments . Bio - IT World . 4 - 14 - 2006 . Ref Type : Magazine Article . [ 9 ] Weber BA , Yarandi H , Rowe MA , Weber JP . A comparison study : paper - based versus web - based data collection and management . Appl Nurs Res 2005 ; 18 ( 3 ) : 182 – 5 . Fig . 4 . REDCap Consortium : Geographical representation of 27 active domestic and international collaborating institutions . Locations depicted do not include sites where software is used , but hosted at another institution ( example Venezuela , Argentina , Peru , Mexico , Honduras , Haiti , Chile , and Brazil data entry partner sites ) . P . A . Harris et al . / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 ( 2009 ) 377 – 381 381