978 - 1 - 7281 - 5255 - 1 ©2019 IEEE 1605 The 2019 6th International Conference on Systems and Informatics ( ICSAI 2019 ) Research on Enterprises Group Decision - making System from the Perspective of Knowledge Management Ying Wang School of economics and management Beijing information science and technology university Beijing , China Yejun Luan Production and comprehensive security department China academy of launch vehicle technology Beijing , China Yihua Dou Department for overall design China academy of launch vehicle technology Beijing , China Abstract —During the process of enterprise management , group decision - making and knowledge management are two important management activities which are closely related . The accuracy of decision - making and the decision - making efficiency directly affect the survival and development of an enterprise . Group decision - making based on knowledge management collects the wisdom and knowledge of decision - making individuals at different levels , has advantages incomparable by individual decision - making , and plays a more and more important role in constructing the competition advantages of the enterprise . This essay systematically analyzes and defines the concept and key constituting elements of the enterprise group decision - making system from the perspective of knowledge management , and provides theoretical bases for the enterprises to construct the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management , and improve the decision - making efficiency and scientificalness . Keywords - knowledge management ; group decision - making system ; constituting elements ; interaction I . I NTRODUCTION Professor Simon , a Nobel Prize winner points out “Management is decision - making” [ 1 ] , which shows the important position and role of decision - making in management . The group decision - making theory has become one of the key research objects in the modern decision - making theory and management science theory . As the enterprise environment gets increasingly complicated , the decision - making issue that the enterprises face also gets more and more complicated . Therefore , the new group decision - making theoretical system and method need to be developed in such background , so as to help the enterprises to solve the decision - making problem in the new situation . The group decision - making process is itself a knowledge learning and sharing process . Therefore , the group decision - making process is closely linked to the knowledge management process , and the knowledge management level of the enterprises decides the decision - making efficiency and accuracy of the enterprises . The scientific group decision - making of enterprises depends on the effective management of the enterprises to knowledge . Thus , the accurate definition to the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management and the profound analysis to the constituting elements and operation law of the system are new requirements on enterprise management in the era of knowledge - driven economy , and the needs for integrating the decision - making and knowledge management theories with the practice of the enterprises . II . C ONCEPT OF ENTERPRISE GROUP DECISION - MAKING SYSTEM BASED ON KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT Early in the 1970s , the group decision - making concept was put forward . Wang , etc . believed that group decision - making is to collect different members’ preferences to all schemes in the scheme set into the consistent or compromising group preference order [ 2 ] of a decision - making group according to some rule . Due to the internal complexity of group decision - making , intersection of subjects and different research perspectives of the scholars , the terms and assumed conditions quoted in the research will be different , and various research modes of group decision - making are formed . Currently , most researches of domestic and foreign scholars on group decision - making describe and analyze the group decision - making process with the group preference theory , behavioral decision - making theory and fuzzy theory , and few of them analyze the process and characteristics of enterprise group decision - making from the knowledge management process . The decision - making tasks faced by enterprise group decision - making is usually unstructured , and is always difficult to be solved with the knowledge and experience of only one decision - maker , so decision - making subjects with different knowledge background need to participate in it . The group decision - making process and result are realized through several stages , namely the independent thinking , group exchange , information and knowledge sharing , consensus reaching by different decision - making subjects . Such processes are accompanied with knowledge sharing , knowledge transfer , knowledge learning , knowledge application and other characteristics of knowledge management . The decision - making subjects need to integrate all knowledge when making decisions , and the richer their knowledge is , the more scientific and effective are their decision - making . 1606 III . C ONSTITUTING ELEMENTS OF ENTERPRISE GROUP DECISION - MAKING SYSTEM BASED ON KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT From the search of relevant scholars we can find that the group decision - making process is considered as a dynamic development process [ 3 ] involving relevant variables within and outside a group . From the internal perspective of an enterprise , the personal characteristics of the personnel participating in the decision - making , decision - making goal , organization structure , enterprise culture , the corresponding decision - making aiding system and other factors play an important role and have impact on the group decision - making ; from the external perspective of the enterprise , the group decision - making is related to the external environments that the enterprise faces , e . g . economic environment , technical environment , industrial competition , interaction between the enterprise and external affiliated parties and other variables involving non - psychological factors [ 4 ] . To sum up , considering the definition of the enterprise group decision - making system , the essay holds that key constituting elements affecting the preparation and implementation of the enterprise group decision - making process include six aspects , i . e . the characteristics of the decision - making subjects ( decision - making participants ) , decision - making tasks , decision - making system , decision - making environment , computer - aided support system for decision - making and the interaction of all constituting elements , as shown in Figure1 . Decision - making subject Interaction of constituting elements External environment Decision - making tasks Decision - making system Group decision support system Group decision - making system based on knowledge management Figure 1 . Constituting elements of the enterprise group decision - making system A . Decision - making Subjects Decision - making subjects , i . e . decision - making participants in the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management , are responsible for collecting and integrating the group decision - making information , preparing decision schemes , selecting the best scheme and implementing decisions . The decision - making subjects are usually decision - making participants who work at different posts , are from different functional departments and have decision - making ability . The deep and wide knowledge of the decision - making subjects will affect the scientificalness of the decision - making . According to the management level of the decision - making subjects and their different roles in the enterprise group decision - making process , the decision - making subjects can be classified into three types , i . e . grass - roots employees , middle - level management and senior management . The grass - roots employees have quite professional technologies and knowledge , their knowledge structure is quite single compared with that of the senior management and is often used for solving their personal daily business , they have limited knowledge to the functional departments of the enterprise and play the least important role in the enterprise performance . The middle - level management is mainly composed of the heads of all departments of the enterprise , leaders of independent teams and groups and workshop directors , the knowledge that they possess is mostly used for finishing the tasks of their departments or teams , and their mastery of professional knowledge and recognition to all functional departments of the enterprise are better than those of the grass - roots employees . The middle - level management are the bridge and link for the information transmission and brainstorm of the grass - roots employees and the senior management . The senior management are on the top level of the organization level of the enterprise , are responsible for determining the enterprise goal , preparing strategies for achieving the existing goal , and making decisions on issues affecting the enterprise . B . Decision - making Tasks “Decision - making tasks” are the collective name [ 5 ] of all work that the decision - makers look for appropriate performers and approaches in order to achieve a purpose under a certain conditions . Classifying by the level of the decision - making tasks , the decision - making tasks can be classified into strategic decision - making , tactical decision - making and business decision - making . “Strategic decision - making” refers to the decision - making for an enterprise to realize long - term and global development when seeking dynamic balance with the external environment , usually including the determination of enterprise goal and policy , organization adjustment , upgrading of enterprise products , technical renovation , etc . , and has the long - term and directional characteristics . “Tactical decision - making” is also called as management decision - making , and is a kind of decision - making on methods , means , steps , etc . which are adopted for achieving the general strategic goal . “Business decision - making” is a decision - making task for improving the production efficiency and working efficiency in daily work . It involves a narrow scope , and only has local impact on the enterprise . The enterprise needs knowledge with 1607 different width and depth to finish the three decision - making tasks . The complexity of the decision - making tasks will also affect the process and effect of group decision - making , and the changes to the major strategic decision - making of the enterprise , the expansion of new market fields , etc . are quite complicated decision - making tasks . If the tasks are complicated and the means to finish them are complicated , different departments and more personnel need to cooperate and communicate , that requires the enterprise to have a perfect knowledge discovery , knowledge innovation and knowledge sharing system , so as to effectively utilize and integrate such complicated knowledge resources in a shortest time , and provide decision - making support for the best group decision - making . C . Decision - making System A decision - making system refers to regulations , principles , standards and other rules and systems [ 6 ] that an organization designs for relevant members to abide by in order to ensure the effective operation of the decision - making process and the comprehensive implementation of the decision - making goal . In order to ensure the normal operation of group decision - making and the effect of the decision - making activities , all aspects of many decision - making elements are naturally involved , and one of the important aspects is to standardize the decision - making activities by system designing . In order to make the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management orderly , realize and implement enterprise group decision - making with high efficiency , the internal decision - making system of the enterprise shall include the following three aspects : First , how to ensure the normal operation of the group decision - making system , so that the functions of all links of the group decision - making process are reasonably stipulated , the job responsibilities of all departments and personnel participating in the realization and implementation of group decision - making are clear , not omitted and connected orderly , and ensure the completeness of the whole group decision - making process ; second , how to ensure the high - efficiency operation of the group decision - making system , and make sure the actual operation of each stage of group decision - making process is true , scientific and high - efficiency ; third , how to ensure the timeliness and effect of the group decision - making process and effect feedback , so that the decision - making subjects receive the feedback information from all levels and departments during the operation of the group decision - making system , so as to ensure the unblocked knowledge sharing channels among the decision - making subjects , improve the initiative of the decision - making subjects to actively participate in decision - making and share the knowledge resources , and improve the operation efficiency of the group decision - making system . D . Computer - aided Support System The normal operation of the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management needs to rely on a complete set of computer - aided support system . The system connects all functional departments and the decision - making subjects on all levels , timely and effectively processes all knowledge and information during the decision - making process through a series of standardized operation processes , works out decision schemes which meet the binding conditions by quantitative analysis , for the decision - making subjects to choose . Group decision support system ( GDSS ) is a novel decision - aided tool [ 7 ] developing based on the decision support system ( DSS ) . The article holds that the enterprise group decision support system based on knowledge management is a Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) . It has a good user interaction platform , knowledge sharing mechanism and intelligent analysis algorithm , can aid the decision - making subjects to make group decisions , and provide decision selection schemes for solving the semi - structured or unstructured decision - making problem in special fields . According to the above analysis and functional description , the structure of GDSS based on knowledge management shall include four parts : human - machine interaction subsystem , decision support subsystem , knowledge production subsystem and database management subsystem , as shown in Figure2 . The working principle of the enterprise group decision support system based on knowledge management is as follows : After clarifying the decision - making tasks , input the decision - making tasks into the computer - aided system ; the system selects whether there are existing models to be matched from the model library or not with the problem solver of the decision support subsystem , and calculates the matched degree according to a certain algorithm ; search knowledge and data which are matched with the decision - making tasks with the inference engine , generate optional models and index elements . If the decision - makers are satisfied , the system will further give several decision schemes which meet relevant conditions for them to choose ; if not , the decision - making subjects will coordinate face to face or by online discussion , reselect the models and index elements , and then generate several decision schemes for the decision - makers to choose . The decision - making subjects choose the best scheme from the schemes provided by the system accordingly . Every time after decision - making , the system maintainers will supplement the models and algorithm which are added during the decision - making process into the model library and algorithm library , meanwhile this time of decision - making will be supplemented into the knowledge base as experiential knowledge , so that the whole system is updated and the contents are enriched continuously . Knowledge sharing , knowledge exchange , knowledge processing and knowledge innovation between the decision - making subjects go through the decision - making process of the computer - aided system . 1608 Human - machine interaction system Problem solver Self - adaption system Learning module Algorithm management Knowledge matching Learning module Model updating Model matching Knowledge base Algorithm library Model library Database Personalized services Exchange community Decision research Knowledge digging Decision - making knowledge portal Knowledge exploration Input the decision - making task Output the decision - making scheme Decision interface Decision support subsystem Database management system Knowledge production system Knowledge acquisition Knowledge organization Knowledge exchange Knowledge processing Knowledge innovation Knowledge diffusion Figure 2 . GDSS system structure on knowledge managementt E . Decision - making Environment “Decision - making environment” refers to the environmental factors which play an objective affecting role in the preparation and implementation of decisions , and includes the internal and external environmental factors of the enterprise . Simon believes , decisions are on the premises of facts and values [ 8 ] . The factual premise is the cognition and judgment to the objective facts that the decisions are based on , while the value premise is the value judgment to the decision results , and they jointly decide the selection of decisions . Whether the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management can make the best decision with high efficiency or not depends on that whether the information mastered by the decision - making subjects is sufficient and whether the knowledge is complete or not , and the initiative expressed by the value judgment of the decision - making subjects based on decision - making tasks . The completeness of the information mastered by the decision - making subjects is closely related to the internal and external environments of the enterprise : The internal soft and hard environments of the enterprise make it possible to fully share information and knowledge , which requires a smooth and high - efficiency information communication and sharing platform ; the good interaction between the enterprise and the external environment ensures the diversification of knowledge and information during the decision - making process of the enterprise . The non - additively characteristic of the whole and local enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management is reflected through the sharing and value adding of the information . F . Interaction of Constituting Elements The enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management is an organic whole in which five constituting elements with connection , interaction and dependency . Such five constituting elements complement one another , interact , and promote the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management to achieve the best effect . They are changeable , and the change of any one element may affect other elements , and thus affect the development of the whole enterprise group decision - making 1609 system based on knowledge management . The lack , unclear understanding or improper use of any one constituting element will lead to the change and even failure of other constituting elements , and only by the mutual coordination and interaction of the five key constituting elements can a complete and sound enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management be constituted , and can the smooth operation of the whole system and the implementation of the final decision be realized . Meanwhile , the whole group decision - making system keeps exchanging information , so as to form the information flow from the input end to the output end of the system . The interaction of the decision elements reflect the inner , essential and necessary connection between the constituting elements of the group decision - making system and the elements during the decision - making process . In the enterprise group decision - making system , the five constituting elements are not isolated but inter - dependent and mutually conditional . IV . C ONCLUSION The essay conducts study from the perspective of effective knowledge management , and tries to define and analyze the group decision - making system from the innovation perspective . It scientifically defines the concept of the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management , analyzes the key constituting elements of the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management and the specific roles of each element in detail , summarizes the interaction principle of all the constituting elements , so as to outline the basic framework of the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management . It provides theoretical bases for the enterprises to construct the enterprise group decision - making system based on knowledge management , and improves the decision - making efficiency and scientificalness . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This paper is funded by the key project of Beijing Education Commission ' s Social Science Program , " Research on Evolution Path and Innovation Performance Evaluation of Beijing KIBS Innovation Ecosystem - from the perspective of sustainable development " ( SZ201911232029 ) and the National Key R & D Program of China " Development and application of the integrated inspection and testing service platform for emerging industries " . ( 2018YFB1403302 ) . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] H . S . Shih , J . E . Shyur , S . Lee , " An Extension of TOPSIS for Group Decision Making , " Mathematical and Computer Modeling , vol . 45 , pp . 801 - 813 (cid:712) 2007 . [ 2 ] C . L . Wang , " Group Decision Making under Multiple Criteria Methods and Applications , " Berlin , New York , Springer - Verlay , 1987 , pp . 55 - 71 . [ 3 ] Ben Arieh , Z . Chen , " Linguistic Group Decision - making : Opinion Aggregation and Measures of Consensus , " Fuzzy Optimization and Decision Making , 2006 , vol . 5 , pp . 117 - 133 . [ 4 ] J . Cabrerizo , S . Alonso , E . Herrera - Viedma , " A Consensus Model for Group Decision Making Problems with Unbalanced Fuzzy Linguistic Information , " International Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making . 2009 , vol . 8 , pp . 109 - 131 . [ 5 ] T . Davenport , L . Prusak , " Working knowledge : How organizations manage what they know , " Boston : Harvard Business School , 1998 , pp . 69 - 78 . [ 6 ] Zellner , Fornahl . " Scientific knowledge and implications for its diffusion , " Journal of Knowledge management , 2007 , vol . 6 , pp . 190 - 198 . [ 7 ] Fjermestad , S . R . Hiltz . " An Assessment of Group Support Systems Experiment Information Research : Methodology and Results , " Journal of Management Systems . 1998 , vol . 15 , pp . 7 - 14 . [ 8 ] Jessup , " A Framework of Constraint - Based Modeling for Cooperative Decision Systems , " Knowledge - Based System . 2013 vol . 10 , pp . 417 - 434 .