Neurobiology of Disease LTP Induction Translocates Cortactin at Distant Synapses in Wild - Type But Not Fmr1 Knock - Out Mice Ronald R . Seese , 1 * Alex H . Babayan , 1 * Adam M . Katz , 1 Conor D . Cox , 1 Julie C . Lauterborn , 1 Gary Lynch , 1 , 2 and Christine M . Gall 1 , 3 Departments of 1 Anatomy and Neurobiology , 2 Psychiatry and Human Behavior , and 3 Neurobiology and Behavior , University of California , Irvine , California 92697 - 1275 Stabilization of long - term potentiation ( LTP ) depends on reorganization of the dendritic spine actin cytoskeleton . The present study testedwhetherthisinvolvesactivity - driveneffectsontheactin - regulatoryproteincortactin , andwhethersucheffectsaredisturbedinthe Fmr1 knock - out ( KO ) model of fragile X syndrome , in which stabilization of both actin filaments and LTP is impaired . LTP induced by theta burst stimulation ( TBS ) in hippocampal slices from wild - type mice was associated with rapid , broadly distributed , and NMDA receptor - dependent decreases in synapse - associated cortactin . The reduction in cortactin content was blocked by blebbistatin , while basal levels were reduced by nocodazole , indicating that cortactin’s movements into and away from synapses are regulated by microtu - bule and actomyosin motors , respectively . These results further suggest that synapse - specific LTP influences cytoskeletal elements at distant connections . The rapid effects of TBS on synaptic cortactin content were absent in Fmr1 KOs as was evidence for activity - driven phosphorylation of the protein or its upstream kinase , ERK1 / 2 . Phosphorylation regulates cortactin’s interactions with actin , and copre - cipitation of the two proteins was reduced in the KOs . We propose that , in the KOs , excessive basal phosphorylation of ERK1 / 2 disrupts its interactions with cortactin , thereby blocking the latter protein’s use of actomyosin transport systems . These impairments are pre - dicted to compromise the response of the subsynaptic cytoskeleton to learning - related afferent activity , both locally and at distant sites . Introduction Newly induced long - term potentiation ( LTP ) passes through a 10 – 15 min period during which the potentiated state becomes extremely persistent , a process requiring the assembly and subse - quent stabilization of spine filamentous ( F ) actin ( Krucker et al . , 2000 ; Rex et al . , 2009 ) . Recent work determined that signaling involvingtheGTPaseRhoAandtheactin - severingproteincofilin iscriticalfortheformationofnewfilaments ( Rexetal . , 2009 ) , but the events underlying their delayed stabilization are poorly understood . Clues came with the observation that theta burst stimulation ( TBS ) commonly used to produce LTP activates p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) and Src tyrosine kinases ( Chen et al . , 2007 , 2010a ) . PAK and Src target cortactin ( Lua and Low , 2005 ) , a protein that promotes F - actin elaboration and stabilization in many cellular systems . Cortactin activates the Arp2 / 3 complex , initiates F - actin branching , and stabilizes branch sites ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ; Uruno et al . , 2001 ; Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . Cortactin also prevents F - actin depolymerization by capping barbed ends ( Le Clainche et al . , 2007 ) and inhibiting cofilin ( Oser et al . , 2009 ) . As expected from this , cortactin regulates and maintains dendritic spine morphology in cultured neurons ( Hering and Sheng , 2003 ) . Together , these findings suggest that cortactin may con - tribute to the production and stabilization of changes in spine anatomy that occur with LTP ( De Roo et al . , 2008 ; Yang et al . , 2008 ) . Cortactin’s influence on actin networks and morphology in nonneuronal cells depends on movement between membrane and cytoplasmic compartments . Notably , events associated with LTP—activation of synaptic brain - derived neurotrophic factor and glutamate receptors—cause cortactin to move into and out of spines in dissociated neurons , respectively ( Hering and Sheng , 2003 ; Iki et al . , 2005 ; Chen and Hsueh , 2012 ) . PAK and ERK1 / 2 regulate cortactin mobility ; whether actomyosin motors , which contribute importantly to LTP ( Rex et al . , 2010 ) , are involved is not known . Accordingly , initial goals of the present study were to test whether naturalistic TBS influences cortactin levels at hip - pocampal synapses and whether such effects involve active trans - port mechanisms . Actin regulation is also of interest with regard to spine abnor - malities in neuropsychiatric disorders ( Penzes et al . , 2011 ) . Ab - errant spine morphology is assumed to reflect defects in the underlying cytoskeleton , which could arise from reduced effects of synaptic activity on actin networks . In support of this , LTP does not properly consolidate in rodent models of several human conditions associated with abnormal spines ( Lynch et al . , 2008 ) . For the Fmr1 knock - out ( KO ) model of fragile X syndrome , ReceivedAug . 8 , 2011 ; revisedFeb . 28 , 2012 ; acceptedMarch29 , 2012 . Authorcontributions : R . R . S . , A . H . B . , J . C . L . , G . L . , andC . M . G . designedresearch ; R . R . S . , A . H . B . , A . M . K . , andJ . C . L . performedresearch ; R . R . S . , A . H . B . , C . D . C . , J . C . L . , G . L . , andC . M . G . analyzeddata ; R . R . S . , A . H . B . , J . C . L . , G . L . , andC . M . G . wrotethepaper . This work was supported by NIH Grants MH082042 and NS045260 . R . R . S . was supported in part by Medical ScientistTrainingProgramGrantT32 - GM08620 . WethankDr . ChristopherS . RexandDr . LuluY . Chenforvaluable contributionsleadingtothepresentstudy , andAndrewWang , JihuaLiu , andYueQinYaofortechnicalassistance . * R . R . S . andA . H . B . contributedequallytothiswork . Theauthorsdeclarenocompetingfinancialinterests . CorrespondenceshouldbeaddressedtoChristineM . Gall , DepartmentofAnatomyandNeurobiology , University ofCalifornia , Irvine , Irvine , CA92697 - 1275 . E - mail : cmgall @ uci . edu . DOI : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 0968 - 12 . 2012 Copyright©2012theauthors 0270 - 6474 / 12 / 327403 - 11 $ 15 . 00 / 0 TheJournalofNeuroscience , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 • 7403 which is characterized by poorly developed spines ( Irwin et al . , 2000 ) , the consolidation deficit is associated with impaired actin - regulatory signaling through Rac GTPase ( Chen et al . , 2010b ) . Prompted by these findings , we also evaluated TBS effects on cortactin in adult Fmr1 KO hippocampus . Results show that induction of LTP reduces cortactin concen - trations at wild - type ( WT ) synapses , within and beyond fields of synaptic activation . These effects were profoundly disturbed in Fmr1 KOs , likely reflecting impairments in ERK1 / 2 activation and processes that associate cortactin with local transport ma - chinery . Disruption of synaptic activity effects on cytoskeletal regulatory sequences likely contributes to disturbances in spine morphology , synaptic plasticity , and cognitive function in the mutants . Materials and Methods Animals . Fmr1 KO mice backcrossed onto the FVB - 129 background for 11 generations ( Irwin et al . , 2002 ; Lauterborn et al . , 2007 ) and WT age - matchedFVBmicewereused . Procedureswereconductedinaccordance with NIH guidelines and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of California , Irvine . Electrophysiology . Acute transverse hippocampal slices ( 350 (cid:1) m thick ) were prepared from adult ( 2 - to 4 - month - old ) male Fmr1 KO and WT mice and 2 - month - old male Sprague Dawley rats using a Leica Vibro - slicer as described previously ( Lauterborn et al . , 2007 ) with some modi - fications . The Vibroslicer cutting bath included artificial CSF ( ACSF ) with high Mg 2 (cid:1) [ containing ( in m M ) 124 NaCl , 3 KCl , 1 . 25 KH 2 PO 4 , 5 MgSO 4 , 26 NaHCO 2 , and 10 dextrose , pH 7 . 4 ] or , when specified , cho - line chloride [ containing ( in m M ) 110 choline chloride , 2 . 5 KCl , 1 . 25 NaH 2 PO 4 , 5 MgSO 4 , 25 NaHCO 2 , 25 glucose , 11 . 6 ascorbic acid , and 3 . 1 pyruvic acid , pH 7 . 4 ] ( Li et al . , 2009 ) . Slices were , in all cases , transferred to a holding chamber containing high - Mg 2 (cid:1) ACSF during the cutting process and then to an interface recording chamber set to 31°C with constant perfusion of ACSF containing the following ( in m M ) : 124 NaCl , 3 KCl , 1 . 25 KH 2 PO 4 , 2 . 5 CaCl 2 , 1 . 5 MgSO 4 , 26 NaHCO 2 , and 10 dex - trose , pH 7 . 4 . Slices were equilibrated in the chamber for 2 h before use . For induction of LTP , stimulation electrodes were placed in stratum ( str . ) radiatum of fields CA1a and CA1c , and a field recording electrode was placed in CA1b str . radiatum ; the two stimulation electrodes drove distinct populations of synapses in the recording field and were used to increasethenumbersofsynapsesactivatedwithTBS . Stimulationwasset to elicit field EPSPs ( fEPSPs ) that were 50 % of the maximum population spike - free amplitude . After stable baseline fEPSPs were collected for 20 min , TBS ( 10 bursts of four pulses at 100 Hz ; 200 ms between bursts ) or control stimulation ( three single pulses per minute ) was applied at each stimulation electrode ( with the two stimulation trains separated by 30 – 40s ) ; stimuluspulsedurationwasincreasedto1 . 5 (cid:2) baselinesettings during TBS only . Test responses to three pulses per minute at baseline strength were then collected until tissue harvest . For antidromic stimu - lation experiments , one stimulating electrode was placed in the alveus ( superficial axon bundles ) on the subicular side of the recording elec - trode , which was located in the pyramidal cell layer of CA1b . Following a 10 min baseline , slices were stimulated using control stimulation ( three pulses per minute ) or TBS and then recorded for another 5 min . The stimulatingelectrodewasthenmovedtoasecondalvearsite ; baselinewas againrecordedfollowedbyeithercontrolstimulationorTBS . Sliceswere harvested 10 min later . In some experiments , the myosin II kinase inhibitor blebbistatin ( 10 (cid:1) M ; Tocris Bioscience ) , the microtubule inhibitor nocodazole ( 200 n M ; Tocris Bioscience ) , or the NMDA receptor antagonist DL - 2 - amino - 5 - phosphonopentanoicacid ( APV ; 100 (cid:1) M ; TocrisBioscience ) wasinfused into the tissue bath via a second perfusion line for (cid:3) 30 – 60 min ; the compounds remained in the bath until tissue harvest 7 min following stimulation . Immunohistochemistry . As described previously ( Chen et al . , 2010b ) , hippocampal slices were harvested into cold 4 % paraformaldehyde , sub - sectioned at 20 (cid:1) m using a freezing microtome , and slide mounted . The tissue was incubated overnight at room temperature in a primary anti - sera mixture containing mouse antisera to postsynaptic density - 95 ( PSD - 95 ; 1 : 1000 ; Thermo Scientific , catalog # MA1 - 054 ) or goat antisera to GluR1 ( 1 : 100 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , catalog # sc - 7609 ) in combi - nation with rabbit antisera to cortactin ( 1 : 250 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnol - ogy , catalog # sc - 11408 ) , phosphorylated ( p ) - cortactin Ser405 ( 1 : 500 ; Protea Bio , catalog # AB - 100 ) , or p - ERK1 / 2 Thr202 / Tyr204 ( 1 : 500 ; Cell Signaling Technology , catalog # 4370 ) . After washes in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer ( PB ) , pH7 . 2 , thetissuewasincubatedfor1hatroomtemperature in a mixture of Alexa Fluor 488 anti - mouse IgG or anti - goat IgG with Alexa Fluor 594 anti - rabbit IgG ( 1 : 1000 each ; Invitrogen ) . Primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in 0 . 1 M PB containing 4 % BSA and 0 . 3 % TritonX - 100 . AfterfinalPBrinses , thetissuewascoverslippedwith VectaShield ( Vector Labs ) . For experiments evaluating the incidence of dendritic spine immuno - reactivity for cortactin and p - cortactin , brains of adult ( 2 - to 4 - month - old ) male WT and Fmr1 KO mice were fast frozen in 2 - methylbutane ( (cid:4) 50°C ) and cryostat sectioned on the coronal plane at 20 (cid:1) m . The slide - mounted tissue sections were fixed in (cid:4) 20°C methanol for 20 min , washed in 0 . 1 M PB , and then processed for dual immunofluorescence as described above . Image acquisition and analysis . For hippocampal slice experiments , threetofourtissuesectionsthrougheachslicewereusedtoacquireimage z stacks ( 0 . 2 (cid:1) msteps ) ofimmunolabelingwithintheCA1bstr . radiatum recording field ( between the stimulating electrodes ) using a Leica DM6000 epifluorescence microscope . For fast - frozen brain sections , im - age z stackswerecollected ( asabove ) fromCA1bstr . radiatumofthreeto four tissue sections through midseptotemporal hippocampus . In both instances , images were processed for iterative deconvolution ( Volocity 4 . 1 Restorative Deconvolution ; PerkinElmer ) . Automated in - house soft - ware was then used to construct three - dimensional montages of the 136 (cid:2) 105 (cid:2) 3 (cid:1) m sample fields ( Rex et al . , 2009 ; Chen et al . , 2010b ) to count and measure volumes of single - and double - labeled puncta within the size constraints of dendritic spines . Puncta were counted as double labeled if there was any overlap in their immunolabeled boundaries as evaluatedinthreedimensions . Countsofdouble - labeledPSDswerenor - malized to the total number of PSD - 95 - immunopositive ( (cid:1) ) puncta within a given sample field . Tissue sections with cortactin (cid:1) PSD counts that were more than 4 SDs removed from the mean of the remainder of the sample fields from that group ( all sections for all slices in a group ) were not included in the analysis . The aberrant section values tended to occur on particular slices , resulting in a loss of 3 . 4 % of the slices . Section exclusions because of the 4 SD rule for the remainder of the slices were 4 . 9 % . Synaptoneurosome and Western blot analysis . Male and female WT and Fmr1 KO mice , at 16 – 18 d of age , were deeply anesthetized with isoflu - rane and decapitated . Forebrains were isolated , homogenized in a glass tube with Teflon pestle , and centrifuged at 2500 (cid:2) g to remove contam - inatingerythrocytes . Synaptoneurosomeswereisolatedattheinterfaceof a two - phase ( 7 . 5 and 10 % ) Ficoll gradient following ultracentrifugation at 28 , 000 (cid:2) g for 50 min at 4°C ( Bernard - Trifilo et al . , 2005 ) . Samples were adjusted to 1 . 5 (cid:1) g / (cid:1) l using ACSF and then either ( 1 ) immunopre - cipitated ( Thermo Scientific Co - Immunoprecipitation Kit ) with anti - cortactin ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , catalog # sc - 30772 ) followed by Western blot analysis or ( 2 ) run immediately for 8 , 10 , or 12 % PAGE Western blot analysis ( Rex et al . , 2009 ) . In all cases , blots were incubated overnight at 4°C in primary antisera including mouse antisera to actin ( 1 : 10 , 000 ; Sigma , catalog # A1978 ) and p - ERK1 / 2 Thr202 / Tyr204 ( 1 : 1500 ; Cell Signaling Technology , # 9106 ) and rabbit antisera to ERK1 / 2 ( 1 : 2500 ; Cell Signaling Technology , catalog # 9102 ) , PAK1 ( 1 : 100 ; Cell Signaling Technology , catalog # 2602 ) , PAK3 ( 1 : 100 ; Millipore , catalog # 06 - 902 ) , and cortactin ( 1 : 2000 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , catalog # sc - 11408 ) . Bands were visualized using ECL (cid:1) chemiluminescence ( GE Healthcare ) , quantified using ImageJ ( NIH ) , and normalized to sample actin or input - cortactin content . Statisticalanalyses . Statisticalsignificance ( consideredas p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) was assessed using a two - way repeated - measures ANOVA with planned post hoc comparisons , a two - tailed Student’s t test , or the Mann – Whitney U test . A single n was considered to be a hippocampal slice for immunohis - 7404 • J . Neurosci . , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 Seeseetal . • ImpairedSpineCortactinMovementin Fmr1 KOs tochemicalanalysesfollowingelectrophysiology , ananimalforimmuno - histochemical analyses of brain tissue sections , and an independently treated sample in studies with synaptoneurosomes . Unless otherwise specified , values in text and figures show group means (cid:6) SEM . Results Electron microscopy ( EM ) has produced somewhat conflicting results regarding the localization of cortactin within spines . Preembedding immuno - EM analyses described two pools , a small one near the PSD and a larger pool located deeper within the spine head ( Racz and Weinberg , 2004 ) . These experiments found that only a small percentage of synapses are associated with high levels of the protein . Other work using high - pressure freez - ing EM indicated that nearly all cortactin is distributed within 100 nm of the cytoplasmic face of the synapse ( Rostaing et al . , 2006 ) , but this study did not address variations in cortactin im - munoreactivity ( IR ) across synapses or types of spines . Both works found that cortactin was present at low to negligible levels in axon terminals . Given the uncertainties about localization , we used rigorous criteria to identify postsynaptic elements associ - ated with cortactin IR . First , cortactin - immunopositive puncta were counted as being associated with a synapse only when they overlapped , as evaluated in three dimensions , elements immuno - reactive for the integral PSD protein , PSD - 95 ( Walikonis et al . , 2000 ; Aoki et al . , 2001 ) ( Fig . 1 A ) . Second , to identify cortactin - enriched synapses , we restricted the analysis to cortactin clusters whose labeling intensity was (cid:2) 85 % above the mean for control slices . Using these criteria , 1 – 6 % of the PSD - 95 (cid:1) elements that met the size and eccentricity constraints for synapses were colo - calized with dense concentrations of cortactin in CA1 str . radia - tum of acute hippocampal slices . PSDs ( and concentrations of PSD - 95 ) are exclusively localized to asymmetric , spine synapses in adult rodent str . radiatum ( Aoki et al . , 2001 ; Megías et al . , 2001 ) ; thus , these values reflect numbers of spines containing high concentrations of cortactin IR in the sample field . Theta burst stimulation decreases cortactin (cid:1) synapses in WT hippocampus To test for effects of TBS on spine cortactin content , WT hip - pocampal slices received either one train of 10 theta bursts or control low - frequency ( three pulses per minute ) stimulation de - livered to two stimulating electrodes placed in the apical Schaffer collateral – commissural projections to field CA1b . Slices were harvested at a range of time points from 7 to 90 min after TBS and processed for dual immunofluorescence localization of PSD - 95 and cortactin ; the numbers of double - labeled puncta were quan - tified for the 105 (cid:2) 136 (cid:2) 3 (cid:1) m sample field , and values from slices receiving TBS were normalized to measures from yoked ( same mouse ) , low - frequency controls . TBS caused a pronounced decrease in the number of PSD - 95 (cid:1) elements double labeled for dense cortactin IR in WT slices ; the effect was significant over the period from 7 to 45 min after TBS , with numbers returning to control levels by 90 min after stimulation ( Fig . 1 B , left ) . We repeated the experiment using a modified ACSF ( during cutting only ) that contained choline chloride ( 110 m M ) instead of NaCl ; in agreement with previous reports ( Kirov et al . , 2004 ) , we find that removal of NaCl better preserves dendritic morphology and spine numbers through slice preparation at low temperatures ( A . H . Babayan , unpublished observations ) . In the choline chloride - prepared slices , TBS caused a (cid:3) 50 % decrease in the number of densely cortactin (cid:1) PSDs ( Fig . 1 B , right ) . We further tested for the reduction using the AMPA receptor subunit GluR1 as a marker for excitatory Figure 1 . TBS decreased spine cortactin content in WT slices . Slices received control three pulses per minute stimulation [ control ( con ) ] or TBS to the apical Schaffer - commissural affer - entstofieldCA1andwereprocessedfordualimmunofluorescencelocalizationofcortactinand PSD - 95 . A , Left , Low - powerdeconvolvedphotomicrographshowsmergedimmunolabelingfor PSD - 95andcortactinintheCA1bfieldofanalysisinhippocampusfromaWTmouse . Scalebar , 2 . 5 (cid:1) m . Right , High - power photomicrographs show punctate immunoreactivity for PSD - 95 andcortactin ( andmerged ) afteriterativedeconvolutioninCA1str . radiatum . Scalebar , 1 (cid:1) m . Arrowsandarrowheadsindicatesingle - anddouble - labeledpuncta , respectively . B , Bargraphs shownumbersofdouble - labeledpunctaintheCA1samplefield ; inthisandsubsequentpanels , counts are expressed as a percentage of mean control values . Left , TBS ( black bars , values normalizedtothosefrompairedcontrols ) decreasednumbersofcortactin (cid:1) PSDsinstr . radia - tum of WT slices from 7 to 45 min after stimulation ( n (cid:2) 7 per group ) . Right , TBS applied to slices cut into choline chloride ( c . c . ) - containing ACSF also decreased cortactin (cid:1) PSDs in str . radiatumasassessed7minafterTBS ( n (cid:2) 3pergroup ) . C , Left , AdultWTsliceswerestimulated asabove , harvestedat7minafterTBS , andprocessedfordual - immunofluorescencelocalization ofcortactinandtheAMPAreceptorsubunitGluR1 . Photomicrographsshowpunctateimmuno - reactivity for both markers after iterative deconvolution in CA1 str . radiatum . Arrows and ar - rowheadsindicatesingle - anddouble - labeledelements , respectively . Scalebar , 1 (cid:1) m . Right , Bar graph shows that the number of densely cortactin - immunoreactive elements colocalized withGluR1 (cid:1) clustersfulfillingthesizeandeccentricityconstraintsofsynapsesisdecreasedat 7minafterTBS ( blackbar ) inCA1str . radiatum ( n (cid:7) 10pergroup ) . D , TBSwasappliedtoapical Schaffer - commissural projections ; slices processed for PSD - 95 and cortactin localization , and previously evaluated for apical field labeling at 20 min after TBS ( B ) , were photographed for quantitativeanalysesinthebasaldendriticfield ( str . oriens ) . TBSsignificantlydecreasednum - bersofcortactin (cid:1) PSDsinCA1bstr . oriens ( n (cid:2) 8pergroup ) . * p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ; * * p (cid:5) 0 . 01 ; * * * p (cid:5) 0 . 001versuscontrol . Seeseetal . • ImpairedSpineCortactinMovementin Fmr1 KOs J . Neurosci . , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 • 7405 synapses . Using the same size and eccentricity criteria described above for recognizing synapses , we found that 1 . 84 (cid:6) 0 . 49 % ( mean (cid:6) SD ) of the synapse - sized GluR1 clusters were tightly associated with dense concentrations of cortactin IR in slices ad - ministered only control stimulation . TBS reduced this double - labeled value to 1 . 24 (cid:6) 0 . 32 % ( mean (cid:6) SD ) of the total synapse population , a 32 % reduction from control that was highly signif - icant ( p (cid:5) 0 . 005 ) ( Fig . 1 C ) . TBS activates only a small percentage of the synapses in the apical CA1 dendritic field ( Chen et al . , 2007 ) , and it is therefore unlikely that the substantial losses of synaptic cortactin IR de - scribed here are restricted to those contacts directly affected by TBS . Analyses of the CA1b basal dendrites , which are not inner - vated by the stimulated str . radiatum projections ( Amaral and Lavenex , 2007 ) , confirmed this point : theta bursts reduced the number of PSDs associated with dense cortactin IR in str . oriens by about 30 % ( i . e . , to 72 . 8 (cid:6) 8 . 3 % of control ; p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) ( Fig . 1 D ) . To corroborate this finding , the laminar distribution of TBS ef - fects was evaluated in hippocampal slices from adult rat . Theta bursts delivered to str . radiatum caused a decrease in synapses colocalizedwithdenseconcentrationsofcortactininstr . oriensof rat slices as assessed 7 min after stimulation ( control , 4 . 8 (cid:6) 0 . 7 % ; TBS , 2 . 1 (cid:6) 0 . 3 % ; expressed as a percentage of the total PSD - 95 (cid:1) population ; p (cid:7) 0 . 01 for four slices per group ) . We next asked whether the LTP - related events set in motion by TBS are involved in the loss of cortactin labeling at synapses scattered across much of the pyramidal cell’s dendritic tree . WT slices were pretreated with the NMDA receptor antagonist APV for 30 min before TBS and then collected 7 min after stimulation . MatchedcontrolswereinfusedwithAPVbutdidnotreceiveTBS ; an additional two groups ( control stimulation vs TBS ) were tested in the absence of the NMDA receptor antagonist . TBS again markedly ( (cid:4) 41 % ) reduced the number of densely cortac - tin (cid:1) synapses in slices maintained in normal ACSF ( p (cid:5) 0 . 007 ) but failed to produce a statistically significant effect in APV - treated slices ( (cid:4) 22 % ; p (cid:8) 0 . 20 ) ( Fig . 2 A , left ) . Interpretation of these results is complicated by a tendency for APV to reduce the percentage of double - labeled synapses in control ( three pulses per minute stimulation only ) slices ( Fig . 2 A ) ; while this effect did not approach significance ( p (cid:7) 0 . 15 ) , it could conceivably ob - scure any losses produced by TBS . We therefore converted the percentage of doubled - labeled synapses in the two TBS groups to Z scores for differences from the means of their respective con - trols ( value for each TBS slice minus the mean of the no - TBS group divided by the SD of the no - TBS group ) . TBS produced a reduction of (cid:4) 1 . 30 (cid:6) 0 . 50 from matched controls for slices maintained in control ACSF and a (cid:4) 0 . 50 (cid:6) 0 . 58 decrease in APV - treated slices ( means (cid:6) SDs ; p (cid:7) 0 . 016 ) ( Fig . 2 A , right ) . We conclude that blocking NMDA receptors has a marked and Figure2 . TheTBS - inducedreductioninsynapticcortactinisNMDAreceptor - dependentand evident across the broad fluorescence intensity distribution . A , Left , Hippocampal slices from adultWTmicereceivedTBSorcontrol ( con ) stimulationandwereharvested7minlaterfordual immunofluorescencelocalizationofcortactinandPSD - 95inCA1bstr . radiatum . TBS ( blackbars ) reduced numbers of densely cortactin (cid:1) PSDs in WT slices bathed in normal ACSF ( values are expressedasapercentageofpairedACSFcontrols ; * * p (cid:5) 0 . 01vsACSFcontrols ) ; thisreduction was blocked in slices treated with the NMDA receptor antagonist APV ( 100 (cid:1) M ) for 30 min before stimulation ( n (cid:2) 6 per group ) . Right , Bar graph shows Z score differences for double - labeledelementcountsinbothTBSgroups ( ACSForAPV ) comparedtothemeanofeachgroup’s respectivecontrols ( valueforeachTBSsliceminusthemeanoftheno - TBSgroup , dividedbySD oftheno - TBSgroup ) . TBSeffectsoncortactin (cid:1) PSDsweresignificantlysmallerinthepresence of APV compared to those in normal ACSF ( * p (cid:7) 0 . 016 ) . B , Representative antidromic ( anti . ) population spikes , recorded in CA1 pyramidal cells following alvear stimulation , were unaf - fectedbythetabursts . Calibration : 1mV , 5ms . C , Bargraphshowsquantificationofcortactin (cid:1) PSDs following control antidromic or theta burst antidromic stimulation . Antidromic TBS 4 elicitedanonsignificant ( p (cid:7) 0 . 22 ) increaseindouble - labeledcountsinstr . radiatum ( Str . Rad . ) withnochangeinnumberofcortactin (cid:1) PSDsinthestr . oriens ( basaldendriticfield ; valuesare expressedasapercentageofyokedslicesreceivingantidromiccontrolstimulation ; n (cid:2) 5per group ) . D , Curve shows the cortactin immunofluorescence intensity distribution for cortactin / PSD - 95double - labeledelementsinfieldCA1bofWTslicesreceivingcontrolstimulation . E , Bar graph of the same results plotted in D shows the number of double - labeled elements with cortactin (cid:1) labeling intensities falling within the bottom 25 % ( weak labeling ) , middle 50 % ( medium labeling ) , and top 25 % ( dense labeling ) of values from control slices . TBS caused a significant shift in the distribution of elements across these categories ( 2 - way ANOVA , p (cid:7) 0 . 0002 ) , decreasing the intensely cortactin - immunolabeled population with a concomitant increaseintheweaklyimmunolabeledpopulation . * p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ; * * p (cid:5) 0 . 01vsrespectivecontrol ( n (cid:2) 21pergroup ) . 7406 • J . Neurosci . , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 Seeseetal . • ImpairedSpineCortactinMovementin Fmr1 KOs negative effect on TBS - driven changes in the number of densely cortactin (cid:1) synapses . How does theta - driven NMDA receptor activation , in a small set of synapses within a discrete portion of the dendritic tree , produce cell - wide changes in cortactin concentrations at nonac - tivated contacts ? A likely explanation involves the induction of action potentials at cell bodies followed by the retrograde prop - agation of spikes into the proximal apical and basal branches of the neuron’s dendritic arborization . We tested this idea using TBS - driven antidromic spiking of CA1 pyramidal cells . A stimu - lating electrode was placed in the alveus ( superficial axon bun - dles ) on the subicular side of a recording electrode lowered into the CA1b pyramidal cell layer ( identified visually and by cell spik - ing ) , and TBS was delivered after baseline recording . This was repeated for two alvear sites per slice . Single stimulation pulses produced a large ( 3 – 7 mV ) antidromic population spike ( Fig . 2 B ) that was much larger than any recorded during orthodromic TBS . As expected , the size of the antidromic responses was not altered by theta bursts ( Fig . 2 B ) . Normalization to matched con - trols showed that antidromic TBS had no measurable effect on the densely cortactin (cid:1) synapses in str . oriens and caused a non - significantincreaseinstr . radiatum ( Fig . 2 C ) . Inall , cellspikingin the theta burst pattern does not reduce the number of cortactin (cid:1) synapses in hippocampal field CA1 . Collectively , the above results suggest that an event initiated by the prolonged depolarization and calcium increases produced by orthodromic TBS , but not by much briefer cell spiking epi - sodes , spreadsextensivelyalongdendritesandaffectsasignificant number of cortactin - rich synapses . The above analyses dealt with synapses with dense immuno - staining for cortactin ( (cid:2) 85 % above the mean immunolabeling intensity for control slices ) . The marked reductions produced by TBS could therefore reflect an effect on a small population of synapses with particularly high levels of the protein or a TBS - induced leftward shift of the curve relating numbers of colabeled synapses to the intensity of cortactin labeling , thereby affecting a markedly larger population of synapses . We distinguished be - tween these alternatives by constructing a curve relating cortactin immunolabeling intensity to the number of double - labeled con - tacts for control slices and then dividing it into the bottom 25 % ( weak cortactin labeling ) , the middle 50 % ( medium labeling ) , and the top 25 % ( dense labeling ) ( Fig . 2 D ) . The distribution of cortactin (cid:1) contacts across these intensity categories was clearly changed by TBS ( Fig . 2 E ) ( two - way ANOVA , p (cid:7) 0 . 0002 ) : the decrease in densely labeled synapses in the TBS group was accom - panied by an equivalent increase in the proportion of synapses with weak cortactin immunostaining . Importantly , the total number of double - labeled synapses was unchanged by TBS ( con - trol , 14 , 034 (cid:6) 582 per sample zone ; TBS , 13 , 364 (cid:6) 827 ) , as was the total number of PSD - 95 (cid:1) elements ( 30 , 978 (cid:6) 1156 vs 30 , 218 (cid:6) 1559 ) . We conclude from these calculations that TBS reduces cortactin concentrations in a substantial percentage of the synaptic population . Effects of TBS on synaptic cortactin are impaired in Fmr1 KO slices Prior studies showed that TBS increases dendritic spine levels of activated Rac and p - PAK Ser141 in field CA1 of hippocampal slices from WT but not Fmr1 KO mice ( Chen et al . , 2010b ) . Both Rac and PAK modulate cortactin compartmentalization ( Weed et al . , 2000 ; Webb et al . , 2006 ) , suggesting that cortactin move - ment within spines might be impaired in the mutants . Analysis of immunofluorescence within brain tissue sections from adult male Fmr1 KO and WT mice detected no effect of genotype on numbers of densely cortactin (cid:1) puncta double labeled for PSD - 95 within CA1 str . radiatum ( WT , 4 . 44 (cid:6) 0 . 45 % ; KO , 4 . 05 (cid:6) 0 . 26 % ; expressed as a percentage of the total PSD - 95 (cid:1) population ; p (cid:7) 0 . 46 , two - tailed Student’s t test ) ( Fig . 3 A ) . More - over , total cortactin IR in synaptoneurosomal samples did not Figure3 . TBS - inducedchangesinspinecortactincontentareseverelydelayedin Fmr1 KOs . A , Quantificationofcortactin (cid:1) puncta ( Totals ) andthosedoublelabeledforPSD - 95 ( Doubles ) demonstrate no differences between WT ( white bars ) and Fmr1 KO ( gray bars ) male mice , as assessedinfieldCA1bstr . radiatum ( valuesareexpressedasapercentageofWT ) . B , Represen - tativeWesternblotshowscomparablelevelsofcortactinimmunoreactivity ( at85and80kDa ) in synaptoneurosomalsamplesfromWTand Fmr1 KOmice . C , Quantificationofcortactin (cid:1) PSDs inCA1str . radiatumin Fmr1 KOslicesthatreceivedcontrol ( con ) stimulationorTBS ( blackbars , valuesnormalizedtopairedcontrols ) showsthatthethetatrainsignificantlydecreasednum - bersofcortactin (cid:1) PSDsat90minafterTBSonly ( * p (cid:5) 0 . 05vscontrol ; n (cid:2) 7pergroup ) . D , Plot shows fEPSP slopes collected before and after TBS applied to slices from WT and KO mice ( for each slice , mean (cid:6) SEM values are expressed as the percentage of the mean baseline fEPSP slope ; n (cid:7) 8pergroup ) ; themagnitudeofpotentiationwascomparableinthetwogenotypes through20minafterstimulation . Seeseetal . • ImpairedSpineCortactinMovementin Fmr1 KOs J . Neurosci . , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 • 7407 differ between genotypes as determined by Western blot analysis ( Fig . 3 B ) . Nonetheless , and in marked contrast to the results from WT slices , TBS had no effect on the number of PSDs associated with dense cortactin IR in Fmr1 KO mice through the first 20 min after stimulation ; numbers trended lower by 45 min , and were significantly below control values at 90 min after TBS ( Fig . 3 C ) . The markedly delayed effect of TBS on synaptic cortactin IR in the KOs is not likely to reflect differences in EPSP responses to the theta train . As described previously ( Lauterborn et al . , 2007 ) , input / output curves , fEPSP waveforms , and composite responses to the theta bursts are comparable in slices from FVB WT and Fmr1 KO mice . We also found that short - term potentiation and the initial expression of LTP following a 10 - burst theta train are indistinguishable between WT and Fmr1 KO slices ( Lauterborn et al . , 2007 ) . We replicated the latter findings in slices harvested here for immunostaining at later post - TBS time points ( Fig . 3 D ) . Together , these results indicate that impaired activity - dependent changes in cortactin content at Fmr1 KO synapses involve defects in the cellular events set in motion by theta stimulation rather than genotype differences in levels of depolarization achieved with TBS . Active transport maintains cortactin levels at synapses in WT mice The TBS - induced loss and recovery of synaptic cortactin in WT slices could reflect proteolysis followed by the arrival of new pro - tein copies or the operation of translocation processes . To distin - guish between these possibilities , and potentially understand the nature of defects in the Fmr1 KOs , we applied blebbistatin , a potent and selective toxin that inhibits myosin II function and thus activation of myosin motors ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) . As dem - onstrated in prior work with hippocampal slices ( Rex et al . , 2010 ) , the dose of blebbistatin used here has no detectable effect on field CA1 baseline fEPSPs , paired - pulse facilitation , mEPSCs , the input / output curve generated with single pulse stimulation , or theta burst responses , but it does completely block LTP . In the presentstudy , wefurtherdeterminedthatblebbistatininfusedfor 30 – 60 min has no effect on the mean size ( Fig . 4 A ) or size fre - quency distribution ( data not shown ) of PSD - 95 (cid:1) elements in CA1b str . radiatum . Nonetheless , blebbistatin completely elimi - nated TBS - induced decreases in cortactin IR associated with PSDs in hippocampal slices from WT mice ( Fig . 4 B ) . Spines contain significant levels of tubulin , and microtubule treadmilling is hypothesized to contribute to protein transport between spines and dendritic shafts ( Gu and Zheng , 2009 ; Jawor - ski et al . , 2009 ) . Moreover , cortactin reportedly associates with the positive end of microtubules in spines ( Jaworski et al . , 2009 ) . We tested for a microtubule role in regulating spine cortactin levels by acutely treating slices with low concentrations of no - codazole ( 200 n M , 1 h ) , which blocks polymerization of the dy - namic populations of microtubules normally found in spines ( Vasquez et al . , 1997 ; Jaworski et al . , 2009 ) . The results were surprising : nocodazole had no effect on the size ( Fig . 4 C ) or waveforms ( Fig . 4 D ) of fEPSPs , or on the total number of PSD - 95 (cid:1) elements ( data not shown ) , but caused a (cid:3) 35 % decrease in the number of synapses associated with dense concentrations of cortactin IR in WT slices ( p (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) ( Fig . 4 E ) . We next asked whether the labile pool of cortactin IR maintained at synapses by microtubule - dependent processes overlaps that reduced by TBS . Nocodazole was infused beginning 1 h before delivering theta stimulation . Under these conditions , TBS did not detectably change the number of densely cortactin (cid:1) synapses from that found in matched WT slices that received control stimulation as assessed at 7 min ( Fig . 4 E ) . In marked contrast to its actions in WT slices , nocodazole did not reduce the baseline number of double - labeled synapses in Fmr1 KO cases ; as in untreated mu - tant slices , TBS had no effect on numbers of densely cortactin (cid:1) contacts ( Fig . 4 F ) . Collectively , the above results point to the conclusion that WT synapses have a dynamic pool of cortactin that is both continu - ously replenished by a microtubule - dependent mechanism and rapidly diminished by TBS via actomyosin motors . The fragile X mutation appears to block both of these cortactin - related transport - dependent processes . Cortactin’s phosphorylation and actin interactions are deficient in Fmr1 KO hippocampus A failure to properly interact with actin - based transport systems could account for the observed disturbance of TBS effects on Figure4 . Actomyosinandmicrotubulemotorsregulatespinecortactincontent . Hippocam - pal slices from WT and Fmr1 KO mice received TBS or control ( con ) stimulation and were har - vested7minlaterforimmunofluorescenceanalysisofcortactinandPSD - 95doublelabelingin CA1b str . radiatum . A , Bar graph showing no difference in volumes of PSD - 95 (cid:1) elements betweenslicestreatedwiththemyosinIIkinaseinhibitor ( S ) - ( (cid:4) ) - blebbistatin ( blebb ; 10 (cid:1) M ) for 1 h from those bathed in normal ACSF , regardless of stimulation paradigm . B , TBS ( black bars ) reducednumbersofcortactin (cid:1) PSDsinWTslicesbathedinnormalACSF ( valuesnormal - izedtopairedACSFcontrols ; * p (cid:5) 0 . 05vsACSFcon ) ; thisreductionwasblockedinslicestreated with ( S ) - ( (cid:4) ) - blebbistatin ( 10 (cid:1) M ; n (cid:2) 6pergroup ) . C , Treatmentwithnocodazole ( noco ; 200 n M , 1h ) didnotsignificantlyaffectbaselinefEPSPresponsesinWTor Fmr1 KOslices ( mean (cid:6) SEMvaluesareshown ; n (cid:7) 4pergroup ) . D , RepresentativefEPSPtraces , collectedbefore ( black trace ) and after ( red trace ) nocodazole infusion , show no treatment effect on waveforms in slicesfromWT ( top ) or Fmr1 KO ( bottom ) mice . Calibration : 1mV , 5ms . E , Bargraphsshowthat inWTslices , nocodazolereducednumbersofcortactin (cid:1) PSDsincontrolslices ( whitebars ) and preventedfurtherreductionswithTBS ( blackbars ; valuesnormalizedtopairedACSFcontrols ; * p (cid:5) 0 . 05vsWTACSFcontrol ; n (cid:7) 7pergroup ) . F , Inslicesfrom Fmr1 KOmice , neitherTBSnor nocodazoleinfluencednumbersofcortactin (cid:1) PSDs ( n (cid:7) 8forKOcontrols ; n (cid:7) 3forKO - TBS ) . 7408 • J . Neurosci . , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 Seeseetal . • ImpairedSpineCortactinMovementin Fmr1 KOs synaptic cortactin concentrations in Fmr1 KO slices . We tested this using coimmunoprecipitation from synaptoneurosomes . Levels of total actin and cortactin immunoreactivities were com - parableinsamplespreparedfromforebrainsof Fmr1 KOandWT mice , but (cid:3) 40 % less actin coimmunoprecipitated with cortactin in the mutants ( Fig . 5 A ) . Serine phosphorylation regulates cor - tactin’s interactions with F - actin and its ability to translocate within the cell ( Martinez - Quiles et al . , 2004 ; Iki et al . , 2005 ; Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ; Kruchten et al . , 2008 ) . We tested for genotype effects on cortactin Ser405 phosphorylation at synapses in CA1 str . radiatum in brain tissue sections using dual immunostaining and found the number of densely phosphorylated cortactin (cid:1) PSDs to be reduced by (cid:3) 50 % in Fmr1 KOs relative to WTs ( Fig . 5 B ) . Further evidence that kinase signaling to cortactin is disturbed in the mutants was apparent after TBS . A single train of 10 theta bursts produced a robust and reli - able increase in the number of PSDs as - sociated with high concentrations of p - cortactin in slices from WT mice , but had no effect in Fmr1 KOs ( Fig . 5 C ) . These results indicate that phosphoryla - tion defects are likely contributors to the reduced association of cortactin with F - actin in the mutants . We next asked whether changes to up - stream kinases account for the distur - bances just described . Previous work showed that activated ( phosphorylated ) levels of PAK , which plays a prominent role in regulating cortactin mobility ( Campbell et al . , 1999 ; Webb et al . , 2006 ) , are at near - normal levels at Fmr1 KO synapses in hippocampus ( Chen et al . , 2010b ) . We have confirmed this point us - ing Western blots of synaptoneurosomes ( data not shown ) . Analyses of ERK1 / 2 ( also known as p44 / 42 MAPK ) , a second kinase that figures prominently in regu - lating cortactin , have produced mixed re - sults regarding activities in Fmr1 KO forebrain : several studies report that basal levels of total and phosphorylated ERK1 / 2 are comparable in KO and WT mice ( Hu et al . , 2008 ; Ronesi and Huber , 2008 ; Wengetal . , 2008 ; Grossetal . , 2010 ) , while others describe increased levels of p - ERK in hippocampus ( Hou et al . , 2006 ) . Our own analyses using synaptoneurosomes indicate that phosphorylated , but not to - tal , ERK1 / 2 is massively elevated in KO synaptic fractions ( Fig . 5 D ) . Given that the phosphorylated state of the kinase is expected to affect its attachment to cor - tactin , the striking differences between mutant and WT preparations should be reflected in the extent to which the pro - teins coimmunoprecipitate . We confirmed this prediction : immunoprecipitation of cortactinbroughtdownmuchlessERKimmunoreactivityinsynap - toneurosomes from KOs compared to WTs ( Fig . 5 E ) . There was a trend for reduced coprecipitation of PAK1 with cortactin in the KOs , but this did not approach statistical significance ( Fig . 5 E ) . Similarly , coprecipitation of PAK3 with cortactin was not significantly different in samples from KO and WT mice ( p (cid:7) 0 . 27 ; data not shown ) . Figure5 . Cortactin’sserinephosphorylationandassociationwithactinareimpairedin Fmr1 KOsynapses . A , Left , Representa - tiveWesternblotsofWTand Fmr1 KOsynaptoneurosomalsamplesimmunoprecipitatedwithanti - cortactinandthenprobedfor actin ( bandat (cid:3) 40kDa ) . Thebottomblotshowscomparableinputcortactinlevels ( beforeprecipitation ) . Right , Quantificationof actin - immunoreactivebandsfromblotsofcortactinimmunoprecipitates ( normalizedtoinputcortactinlevels ) showssignificantly reducedassociationofactinwithcortactininKOsynaptoneurosomes ( graybars ; * * p (cid:5) 0 . 01vsWT ; n (cid:2) 7pergroup ; in A , B , D , and E , theKOmeasuresareexpressedaspercentagesofWTvalues ) . B , Left , Photomicrographsshowpunctateimmunoreactivityfor p - cortactin ( Ser405 ) andPSD - 95inCA1str . radiatum ; arrowsandarrowheadsindicatesingle - anddouble - labeledpuncta , respec - tively . Scalebar , 1 (cid:1) m . Right , Countsoftotalp - cortactin ( Ser405 ) - immunopositivepuncta ( Totals ) andthosedouble - labeledfor PSD - 95 ( Doubles ) demonstrate that within KOs ( gray bars ) , compared to WTs ( white bars ) , field CA1 numbers of p - cortactin (cid:1) puncta are lower , most particularly within the PSD - 95 (cid:1) postsynaptic compartment ( * * p (cid:5) 0 . 01 vs WT ) . C , TBS ( black bars ) increases counts of p - cortactin (cid:1) PSDs in WT , but not KO , slices [ values normalized to paired controls ( con ) ; * p (cid:5) 0 . 05 vs WT control ; n (cid:2) 8 per group ] ; in C and F , values from TBS groups are expressed as percentages of those from the same - genotype controlmeans . D , Left , RepresentativeWesternblotsofWTand Fmr1 KOforebrainsynaptoneurosomalsamplesprobedforp - ERK ( Thr202 / Tyr204 ; bands at 44 and 42 kDa ) . Blot of actin illustrates consistent loading . Right , Quantification of p - ERK ( Thr202 / Tyr204 ) IR , divided by sample actin IR , shows robust hyperphosphorylation of ERK in the Fmr1 KO synaptic fractions ( gray bars ) compared to WT samples ( values normalized to WT ; * * p (cid:5) 0 . 01 ; n (cid:2) 8 per group ) . Total synaptic ERK content is comparable betweenthetwogenotypes ( p (cid:7) 0 . 15 ; n (cid:7) 5pergroup ) . E , Left , RepresentativeWesternblotsofWTand Fmr1 KOsynaptoneu - rosomalsamplesimmunoprecipitatedwithanti - cortactinandthenprobedforERK1 / 2 ( bandsat44and42kDa ) . Thebottomblot showscomparableinputcortactinlevels . Right , QuantificationofERK - immunoreactive ( 44kDa ) andPAK1 - immunoreactivebands fromblotsofcortactinimmunoprecipitates ( normalizedtoinputcortactinlevels ) showssignificantlyreducedassociationofERK withcortactininKOsynaptoneurosomes ( graybars ; valuesnormalizedtoWT ; * * p (cid:5) 0 . 01vsWT ; n (cid:2) 4pergroup ) . F , TBS ( black bars ) increasesnumbersofPSDsassociatedwithp - ERK ( Thr202 / Tyr204 ) inWT , butnotKO , fieldCA1 ( valuesnormalizedtopaired controls ; * * p (cid:5) 0 . 01vsWTcontrol ; n (cid:2) 5pergroup ) . Seeseetal . • ImpairedSpineCortactinMovementin Fmr1 KOs J . Neurosci . , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 • 7409 The hyperphosphorylation of ERK in the mutants would also be expected to disturb any response of the kinase to TBS . We tested this and found that TBS doubled the number of PSDs colocalized with p - ERK in WT slices while having no detectable effect in the mutants ( Fig . 5 F ) . Collectively , results described in this section suggests a hypothesis in which abnormal phosphor - ylation of ERK leads to ( 1 ) a baseline reduction in cortactin phos - phorylation in the synaptic compartment , resulting in ( 2 ) reduced association of the protein with actomyosin motors and ( 3 ) a subsequent failure of TBS to translocate cortactin away from synapses . Discussion The present results demonstrate that TBS causes rapid reductions in cortactin levels at excitatory synapses in adult hippocampus of WT , but not Fmr1 KO , mice . Although intense NMDA receptor activation has been shown to cause cortactin redistribution from spines into the dendritic shaft ( Hering and Sheng , 2003 ; Iki et al . , 2005 ) , our studies provide novel evidence that naturalistic activ - ity patterns used to induce LTP elicit rapid , activity - driven , and motor - dependent movement of the protein away from synapses in adult brain . Moreover , the distribution of changes in synaptic cortactin IR indicates that the effect is not limited to contacts activated by TBS . A sizable body of work indicates that LTP is synapse specific , an observation critical to the argument that the effect is a sub - strate for memory . The present results challenge the synapse specificity of at least some of the neurochemical changes associ - ated with LTP . Specifically , we show that potentiation of a sub - population of synapses in CA1 str . radiatum reduces cortactin levels at distant synapses , including those within str . oriens . This suggests that localized LTP affects how distant contacts will re - spond to subsequent afferent activity . Without challenging the synapse specificity of LTP , prior work has shown that potentia - tion in one population of synapses initiates protein synthesis - dependent events that lower the threshold for modification in neighboring synapses ( i . e . , synaptic “tagging” ) ( Alarcon et al . , 2006 ; Reymann and Frey , 2007 ) . Cortactin translocation could represent part of the tagging machinery but , as the shift occurs within minutes of stimulation , it is likely to cause changes well in advance of protein synthesis - dependent events . The spatially extended effects of TBS were detected by evalu - ating PSDs associated with dense cortactin IR in particular , an approach that facilitated quantitative analysis of TBS - induced changes . However , analysis of the broad cortactin immunofluo - rescence intensity distribution showed that TBS shifts the distri - bution of synaptic cortactin (cid:1) clusters from “dense cortactin IR” to “weak cortactin IR” categories without changing the total number of double - labeled contacts . Thus , cortactin did not va - cate spines , as has been reported to occur in cultured cells with intense NMDAR stimulation . It will be of interest in future re - search to determine whether delivery of TBS to multiple sites on target neurons , as opposed to the single apical sublamina used here , reduces cortactin levels in a greater proportion of synapses . This could have functional consequences that do not necessarily violate the synapse specificity of LTP . As discussed , cortactin reg - ulates the architecture and stability of the actin cytoskeleton , and these effects reflect its disposition across subcellular compart - ments ( Weed et al . , 2000 ; Oser et al . , 2009 ) . Since cytoskeletal reorganization is critical to the stabilization , but not induction or initial expression , of LTP ( Lynch et al . , 2008 ; Ramachandran and Frey , 2009 ) , we propose that widespread effects on cortactin compartmentalization represent a form of metaplasticity ( Pe´rez - Otan˜o and Ehlers , 2005 ) that affects serial consolidation events set in motion by the arrival of TBS at previously naive connec - tions . Consolidation both maintains LTP ( Lynch et al . , 2007 ; Bramham , 2008 ) and increases its resistance to reversal by low - frequency stimulation ( Sta¨ubli and Scafidi , 1999 ; Krama´r and Lynch , 2003 ) . Thus , tests for reversibility could be used to deter - mine whether induction of localized LTP affects the stability of subsequently induced potentiation at distant synapses in a cortactin - dependent fashion . In all , the present study raises the Figure 6 . Actomyosin motors and microtubules mediate synaptic cortactin motility , and fragileXmodelmiceunderutilizebothsystems . A , AtWTsynapsesinthebasalstate , synaptic cortactin concentrations ( red - filled circles ) are maintained by nocodazole - sensitive , microtu - bule mechanisms ( blue arrow ) . B , Following TBS , synaptic ERK and cortactin are phosphory - lated ( orange - filled circles , p - cortactin ) . These synaptic signaling modifications are accompaniedbyapronounced , blebbistatin - sensitivedecreaseinsynapticcortactinlevels , in - dicatingthatnaturalisticafferentactivityusesmyosinmotors ( bluearrow ) toactivelytranslo - catecortactinawayfromthePSD . * Theillustratedassociationandmotilityofp - cortactinwith actomyosinmotorsarebasedonreportsthatcortactin’sphosphorylationmediatesitsassocia - tionwithactin . Thus , itisproposedthatfollowingTBS , cortactinisfirstphosphorylatedandthen transportedawayfromthePSD . C , In Fmr1 KOmice , basalsynapticERKishyperphosphorylated ( * * ) andcompletelyunresponsivetochangesinafferentdrive ( thinarrows ) . Asaresult , inthe mutants , ERKfailstoassociatewithandphosphorylatecortactin , therebysubstantiallydecreas - ingsynapticp - cortactinlevelsanddisruptingbothcortactin’sassociationwithactinandtheta - driven movement away from PSDs ( dashed arrow , right ) . Moreover , abnormalities in phosphorylationofERK , akinasethatalsoregulatesmicrotubuledynamics , mayaccountforthe finding that constitutive cortactin levels at the PSD are not maintained by a nocodazole - sensitivetransportsystem ( dashedarrow , left ) intheKOs . 7410 • J . Neurosci . , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 Seeseetal . • ImpairedSpineCortactinMovementin Fmr1 KOs possibility that learning - related afferent activity elicits neuron - wide changes that influence the later production of enduring synaptic changes . Our results place constraints on mechanisms likely to mediate TBS effects on synaptic cortactin levels . Theta - driven antidromic spikes had no significant effects on numbers of densely cortac - tin (cid:1) PSDs , suggesting that backpropagation of action potentials into dendrites is not involved . However , the NMDA receptor antagonist APV blocked the interaction between TBS and synap - tic cortactin content . Possibly , repetitive and prolonged ( 50 – 100 ms ) episodes of depolarization produced by TBS ( Larson and Lynch , 1988 ; Chen et al . , 2010a ; zur Nedden et al . , 2011 ) , or elevations of local calcium concentrations that follow NMDA receptor activation , initiate biochemical events that spread for some distance into the dendritic tree . A first step in discriminat - ing between the depolarization versus calcium explanations will be to determine whether pharmacologically enhancing TBS - induced depolarization in str . radiatum ( e . g . , with GABA A recep - tor antagonists ) reduces synaptic cortactin in basal dendrites in the presence of APV . Blocking myosin II motors with blebbistatin ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) , at concentrations that do not affect baseline transmission ( Rex et al . , 2010 ) , eliminated TBS effects on spine cortactin . The nonmuscle myosin light chain is phosphorylated within spines by TBS ( Rex et al . , 2010 ) , an event required for actin polymerization and LTP stabilization , and is a binding partner of cortactin ( Brown et al . , 2010 ) . These points strongly suggest that myosin II motors either directly transport cortactin away from synapses or promote formation of actin networks needed for such transport . A complementary mechanism is suggested by the finding that nocodazole , which accelerates depolymerization of dynamic mi - crotubules ( Vasquez et al . , 1997 ) , reduced the basal number of densely cortactin (cid:1) synapses in WT slices . Combined , the results describe a dynamic subsynaptic system in which tubule - dependent influx offsets a steady loss of cortactin , while events that occur during or shortly after TBS engage actomyosin motors to generate a sudden and pronounced depletion of the active ( nocodazole - sensitive ) pool ( Fig . 6 A , B ) . A more detailed version of this argument will require temporal parameters for the base - line cycling of the protein ; notably , replacement after TBS re - quired over 1 h , indicating that influx is relatively slow . Beyond this lies the critical question of how intense depolarization and / or localized increases in calcium concentrations extend the influ - ence of LTP to actomyosin networks in distant spines . The effects of LTP along with the machinery proposed in Fig - ure 6 , A and B , to control cortactin movement were profoundly disturbed in Fmr1 KO hippocampus : TBS did not rapidly reduce synaptic cortactin content , and nocodazole had no effect on basal concentrations . These results describe novel defects in the mu - tants that are plausibly related to the maintenance of spine mor - phology and synaptic plasticity . A search for underlying causes revealed that baseline cortactin serine phosphorylation was greatly reduced at Fmr1 KO synapses , as were increases in spine p - cortactin produced by TBS . Phosphorylation regulates cortac - tin’s association with actomyosin motors ( Lua and Low , 2005 ) , and , indeed , coimmunoprecipation demonstrated that cortac - tin’s association with actin was reduced in Fmr1 KO synaptoneu - rosomes . These findings suggest that the fundamental problem lies in the association of cortactin with upstream kinases . Coim - munoprecipitation experiments confirmed this prediction with regard to ERK1 / 2 . Immunohistochemical analyses then estab - lished that the TBS - induced increases in synaptic p - ERK , which are robust in WT slices , are entirely absent in the mutants . These results extend descriptions of impaired ERK responses in KOs to various neuromodulators ( i . e . , mGluR agonists , histamine , gly - cine ) ( Hou et al . , 2006 ; Hu et al . , 2008 ; Kim et al . , 2008 ; Shang et al . , 2009 ; but see Osterweil et al . , 2010 ) to the synaptic compart - ment and responses to naturalistic patterns of afferent input . The present study also establishes that the kinase is excessively phos - phorylated in the spine compartment . We therefore propose that baseline disturbances to synaptic ERK1 / 2 activity disrupt normal links between the diffuse effects of LTP induction and the associ - ation of cortactin with actin - and tubulin - based transport ma - chinery ( Fig . 6 C ) . Although the normally rapid , myosin II - dependent transloca - tion response of spine cortactin to TBS is missing in Fmr1 KO mice , a late ( (cid:8) 45 min ) depression of spine cortactin content was observed . This delay is sufficiently long for contributions from protein translation , and there is evidence that excessive local pro - tein synthesis occurs in the KOs ( Li et al . , 2001 ; Qin et al . , 2005 ; Gross et al . , 2010 ; Osterweil et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , it is possible that in these mice TBS triggers exaggerated the production of proteins that interfere with cortactin movement ; an accumulation of these proteins in the spine head after TBS could lead to a delayed dis - ruption of the constitutive positive cortactin flow toward the PSD , and reductions in spine cortactin content , resembling ef - fects produced by nocodazole treatment in the WTs . While spec - ulative , thisworkingmodeldoesmaketheexplicitpredictionthat acute treatments with protein synthesis inhibitors will block the delayed loss of spine cortactin content in the mutants . What functional consequences can be expected from the loss of cortactin mobility at Fmr1 KO spines and synapses ? If the spatially distributed effects of TBS also normally occur at syn - apses innervated by the stimulated axons , then disturbances to cytoskeletal modifications needed for LTP consolidation are likely . We found that cortactin phosphorylation , actin associa - tions , and movement are all disturbed in the KOs ; these deficits are likely to disrupt the coordination of processes needed for normal actin and LTP consolidation in the wake of TBS . Indeed , we have found that the actin filaments that form in spines shortly after TBS are slow to stabilize , as is LTP itself , in Fmr1 KO hip - pocampus ( Chen et al . , 2010b ) . Beyond this , it is likely that defi - cits in widespread translocation responses to learning - related patterns of activity will eventually compromise the integrity of the actin networks governing spine morphology . We therefore speculate that the disturbances described in the present report ( 1 ) affect plasticity at stimulated synapses , ( 2 ) disturb adjustments pertinent to the reaction of distant connections to subsequent input , and ( 3 ) gradually degrade functional properties of spines throughout the dendritic tree . References Alarcon JM , Barco A , Kandel ER ( 2006 ) Capture of the late phase of long - term potentiation within and across the apical and basilar dendritic com - partments of CA1 pyramidal neurons : synaptic tagging is compartment restricted . J Neurosci 26 : 256 – 264 . Amaral D , Lavenex P ( 2007 ) Hippocampal Neuroanatomy . In : The hip - pocampus book ( Andersen P , Morris R , Amaral D , Bliss T , O’Keefe J , eds ) , pp 37 – 114 . New York : Oxford UP . AokiC , MikoI , OviedoH , Mikeladze - DvaliT , AlexandreL , SweeneyN , Bredt DS ( 2001 ) Electron microscopic immunocytochemical detection of PSD - 95 , PSD - 93 , SAP - 102 , and SAP - 97 at postsynaptic , presynaptic , and nonsynaptic sites of adult and neonatal rat visual cortex . Synapse 40 : 239 – 257 . Bernard - Trifilo JA , Krama´r EA , Torp R , Lin CY , Pineda EA , Lynch G , Gall CM ( 2005 ) Integrin signaling cascades are operational in adult hip - pocampal synapses and modulate NMDA receptor physiology . J Neuro - chem 93 : 834 – 849 . Seeseetal . • ImpairedSpineCortactinMovementin Fmr1 KOs J . Neurosci . , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 • 7411 BramhamCR ( 2008 ) Localproteinsynthesis , actindynamics , andLTPcon - solidation . Curr Opin Neurobiol 18 : 524 – 531 . Brown M , Adyshev D , Bindokas V , Moitra J , Garcia JG , Dudek SM ( 2010 ) Quantitative distribution and colocalization of non - muscle myosin light chain kinase isoforms and cortactin in human lung endothelium . Micro - vasc Res 80 : 75 – 88 . Campbell DH , Sutherland RL , Daly RJ ( 1999 ) Signaling pathways and structural domains required for phosphorylation of EMS1 / cortactin . Cancer Res 59 : 5376 – 5385 . ChenLY , RexCS , CasaleMS , GallCM , LynchG ( 2007 ) Changesinsynaptic morphology accompany actin signaling during LTP . J Neurosci 27 : 5363 – 5372 . Chen LY , Rex CS , Sanaiha Y , Lynch G , Gall CM ( 2010a ) Learning induces neurotrophin signaling at hippocampal synapses . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 : 7030 – 7035 . ChenLY , RexCS , BabayanAH , Krama´rEA , LynchG , GallCM , LauterbornJC ( 2010b ) Physiological activation of synaptic Rac (cid:8) PAK ( p - 21 activated kinase ) signaling is defective in a mouse model of fragile X syndrome . J Neurosci 30 : 10977 – 10984 . ChenYK , HsuehYP ( 2012 ) Cortactin - bindingprotein2modulatesthemo - bility of cortactin and regulates dendritic spine formation and mainte - nance . J Neurosci 32 : 1043 – 1055 . Cosen - Binker LI , Kapus A ( 2006 ) Cortactin : the gray eminence of the cyto - skeleton . Physiology 21 : 352 – 361 . DeRooM , KlauserP , GarciaPM , PogliaL , MullerD ( 2008 ) Spinedynamics and synapse remodeling during LTP and memory processes . Prog Brain Res 169 : 199 – 207 . Gross C , Nakamoto M , Yao X , Chan CB , Yim SY , Ye K , Warren ST , Bassell GJ ( 2010 ) Excess phosphoinositide 3 - kinase subunit synthesis and activity as a novel therapeutic target in fragile X syndrome . J Neurosci 30 : 10624 – 10638 . Gu J , Zheng JQ ( 2009 ) Microtubules in dendritic spine development and plasticity . Open Neurosci J 3 : 128 – 133 . Hering H , Sheng M ( 2003 ) Activity - dependent redistribution and essen - tial role of cortactin in dendritic spine morphogenesis . J Neurosci 23 : 11759 – 11769 . Hou L , Antion MD , Hu D , Spencer CM , Paylor R , Klann E ( 2006 ) Dynamic translational and proteasomal regulation of fragile X mental retardation protein controls mGluR - dependent long - term depression . Neuron 51 : 441 – 454 . Hu H , Qin Y , Bochorishvili G , Zhu Y , van Aelst L , Zhu JJ ( 2008 ) Ras signal - ing mechanisms underlying impaired GluR1 - dependent plasticity associ - ated with fragile X syndrome . J Neurosci 28 : 7847 – 7862 . Iki J , Inoue A , Bito H , Okabe S ( 2005 ) Bi - directional regulation of postsyn - aptic cortactin distribution by BDNF and NMDA receptor activity . Eur J Neurosci 22 : 2985 – 2994 . Irwin SA , Galvez R , Greenough WT ( 2000 ) Dendritic spine structural anomalies in fragile - X mental retardation syndrome . Cereb Cortex 10 : 1038 – 1044 . Irwin SA , Idupulapati M , Gilbert ME , Harris JB , Chakravarti AB , Rogers EJ , Crisostomo RA , Larsen BP , Mehta A , Alcantara CJ , Patel B , Swain RA , Weiler IJ , Oostra BA , Greenough WT ( 2002 ) Dendritic spine and den - dritic field characteristics of layer V pyramidal neurons in the visual cor - tex of fragile - X knockout mice . Am J Med Genet 111 : 140 – 146 . Jaworski J , Kapitein LC , Gouveia SM , Dortland BR , Wulf PS , Grigoriev I , Camera P , Spangler SA , Di Stefano P , Demmers J , Krugers H , Defilippi P , Akhmanova A , Hoogenraad CC ( 2009 ) Dynamic microtubules regulate dendritic spine morphology and synaptic plasticity . Neuron 61 : 85 – 100 . Kim SH , Markham JA , Weiler IJ , Greenough WT ( 2008 ) Aberrant early - phaseERKinactivationimpedesneuronalfunctioninfragileXsyndrome . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 : 4429 – 4434 . Kirov SA , Petrak LJ , Fiala JC , Harris KM ( 2004 ) Dendritic spines disappear with chilling but proliferate excessively upon rewarming of mature hip - pocampus . Neuroscience 127 : 69 – 80 . Krama´r EA , Lynch G ( 2003 ) Developmental and regional differences in the consolidation of long - term potentiation . Neuroscience 118 : 387 – 398 . Kruchten AE , Krueger EW , Wang Y , McNiven MA ( 2008 ) Distinct phospho - forms of cortactin differentially regulate actin polymerization and focal adhesions . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 295 : C1113 – C1122 . Krucker T , Siggins GR , Halpain S ( 2000 ) Dynamic actin filaments are re - quired for stable long - term potentiation ( LTP ) in area CA1 of the hip - pocampus . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 : 6856 – 6861 . Larson J , Lynch G ( 1988 ) Role of N - methyl - D - aspartate receptors in the induction of synaptic potentiation by burst stimulation patterned after the hippocampal theta - rhythm . Brain Res 441 : 111 – 118 . Lauterborn JC , Rex CS , Krama´r E , Chen LY , Pandyarajan V , Lynch G , Gall CM ( 2007 ) Brain - derived neurotrophic factor rescues synaptic plastic - ity in a mouse model of fragile X syndrome . J Neurosci 27 : 10685 – 10694 . Le Clainche C , Pauly BS , Zhang CX , Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Cunningham K , Drubin DG ( 2007 ) A Hip1R - cortactin complex negatively regulates ac - tin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J 26 : 1199 – 1210 . Li B , Devidze N , Barengolts D , Prostak N , Sphicas E , Apicella AJ , Malinow R , Emamian ES ( 2009 ) NMDA receptor phosphorylation at a site affected in schizophrenia controls synaptic and behavioral plasticity . J Neurosci 29 : 11965 – 11972 . LiZ , ZhangY , KuL , WilkinsonKD , WarrenST , FengY ( 2001 ) ThefragileX mental retardation protein inhibits translation via interacting with mRNA . Nucleic Acids Res 29 : 2276 – 2283 . Lua BL , Low BC ( 2005 ) Cortactin phosphorylation as a switch for actin cytoskeletal network and cell dynamics control . FEBS Lett 579 : 577 – 585 . Lynch G , Rex CS , Gall CM ( 2007 ) LTP consolidation : substrates , explana - tory power , and functional significance . Neuropharmacology 52 : 12 – 23 . Lynch G , Rex CS , Chen LY , Gall CM ( 2008 ) The substrates of memory : defects , treatments , and enhancement . Eur J Pharmacol 585 : 2 – 13 . Martinez - Quiles N , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Ramesh N , Geha RS ( 2004 ) Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mech - anism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol Cell Biol 24 : 5269 – 5280 . Megías M , Emri Z , Freund TF , Gulya´s AI ( 2001 ) Total number and distri - bution of inhibitory and excitatory synapses on hippocampal CA1 pyra - midal cells . Neuroscience 102 : 527 – 540 . Mullins RD , Heuser JA , Pollard TD ( 1998 ) The interaction of Arp2 / 3 com - plexwithactin : nucleation , highaffinitypointedendcapping , andforma - tion of branching networks of filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 : 6181 – 6186 . Oser M , Yamaguchi H , Mader CC , Bravo - Cordero JJ , Arias M , Chen X , Desmarais V , van Rheenen J , Koleske AJ , Condeelis J ( 2009 ) Cortactin regulates cofilin and N - WASp activities to control the stages of invado - podium assembly and maturation . J Cell Biol 186 : 571 – 587 . Osterweil EK , Krueger DD , Reinhold K , Bear MF ( 2010 ) Hypersensitiv - ity to mGluR5 and ERK1 / 2 leads to excessive protein synthesis in the hippocampus of a mouse model of fragile X syndrome . J Neurosci 30 : 15616 – 15627 . Penzes P , Cahill ME , Jones KA , VanLeeuwen JE , Woolfrey KM ( 2011 ) Den - dritic spine pathology in neuropsychiatric disorders . Nat Neurosci 14 : 285 – 293 . Pe´rez - Otan˜oI , EhlersMD ( 2005 ) HomeostaticplasticityandNMDArecep - tor trafficking . Trends Neurosci 28 : 229 – 238 . QinM , KangJ , BurlinTV , JiangC , SmithCB ( 2005 ) Postadolescentchanges in regional cerebral protein synthesis : an in vivo study in the FMR1 null mouse . J Neurosci 25 : 5087 – 5095 . Racz B , Weinberg RJ ( 2004 ) The subcellular organization of cortactin in hippocampus . J Neurosci 24 : 10310 – 10317 . Ramachandran B , Frey JU ( 2009 ) Interfering with the actin network and its effect on long - term potentiation and synaptic tagging in hippocampal CA1 neurons in slices in vitro . J Neurosci 29 : 12167 – 12173 . Rex CS , Chen LY , Sharma A , Liu J , Babayan AH , Gall CM , Lynch G ( 2009 ) Different Rho GTPase - dependent signaling pathways initiate sequen - tial steps in the consolidation of long - term potentiation . J Cell Biol 186 : 85 – 97 . Rex CS , Gavin CF , Rubio MD , Krama´r EA , Chen LY , Jia Y , Huganir RL , Muzyczka N , Gall CM , Miller CA , Lynch G , Rumbaugh G ( 2010 ) Myo - sin IIb regulates actin dynamics during synaptic plasticity and memory formation . Neuron 67 : 603 – 617 . Reymann KG , Frey JU ( 2007 ) The late maintenance of hippocampal LTP : requirements , phases , ‘synaptic tagging , ’ ‘late - associativity’ and implica - tions . Neuropharmacology 52 : 24 – 40 . RonesiJA , HuberKM ( 2008 ) Homerinteractionsarenecessaryformetabo - tropic glutamate receptor - induced long - term depression and transla - tional activation . J Neurosci 28 : 543 – 547 . Rostaing P , Real E , Siksou L , Lechaire JP , Boudier T , Boeckers TM , Gertler F , Gundelfinger ED , Triller A , Marty S ( 2006 ) Analysis of synaptic ultra - structure without fixative using high - pressure freezing and tomography . Eur J Neurosci 24 : 3463 – 3474 . 7412 • J . Neurosci . , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 Seeseetal . • ImpairedSpineCortactinMovementin Fmr1 KOs Shang Y , Wang H , Mercaldo V , Li X , Chen T , Zhuo M ( 2009 ) Fragile X mental retardation protein is required for chemically - induced long - term potentiation of the hippocampus in adult mice . J Neurochem 111 : 635 – 646 . Sta¨ubli U , Scafidi J ( 1999 ) Time - dependent reversal of long - term potentia - tion in area CA1 of the freely moving rat induced by theta pulse stimula - tion . J Neurosci 19 : 8712 – 8719 . Straight AF , Cheung A , Limouze J , Chen I , Westwood NJ , Sellers JR , Mitchi - son TJ ( 2003 ) Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II inhibitor . Science 299 : 1743 – 1747 . Uruno T , Liu J , Zhang P , Fan Yx , Egile C , Li R , Mueller SC , Zhan X ( 2001 ) Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerization by cortac - tin . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 259 – 266 . VasquezRJ , HowellB , YvonAM , WadsworthP , CassimerisL ( 1997 ) Nano - molar concentrations of nocodazole alter microtubule dynamic instabil - ity in vivo and in vitro . Mol Biol Cell 8 : 973 – 985 . Walikonis RS , Jensen ON , Mann M , Provance DW Jr , Mercer JA , Kennedy MB ( 2000 ) Identification of proteins in the postsynaptic density frac - tion by mass spectrometry . J Neurosci 20 : 4069 – 4080 . WeaverAM , KarginovAV , KinleyAW , WeedSA , LiY , ParsonsJT , CooperJA ( 2001 ) Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr Biol 11 : 370 – 374 . Webb BA , Zhou S , Eves R , Shen L , Jia L , Mak AS ( 2006 ) Phosphorylation of cortactin by p21 - activated kinase . Arch Biochem Biophys 456 : 183 – 193 . Weed SA , Karginov AV , Schafer DA , Weaver AM , Kinley AW , Cooper JA , Parsons JT ( 2000 ) Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 151 : 29 – 40 . Weng N , Weiler IJ , Sumis A , Berry - Kravis E , Greenough WT ( 2008 ) Early - phase ERK activation as a biomarker for metabolic status in fragile X syndrome . Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 147B : 1253 – 1257 . Yang Y , Wang XB , Frerking M , Zhou Q ( 2008 ) Spine expansion and stabilization associated with long - term potentiation . J Neurosci 28 : 5740 – 5751 . zur Nedden S , Hawley S , Pentland N , Hardie DG , Doney AS , Frenguelli BG ( 2011 ) Intracellular ATP influences synaptic plasticity in area CA1 of rat hippocampus via metabolism to adenosine and activity - dependent acti - vation of adenosine A1 receptors . J Neurosci 31 : 6221 – 6234 . Seeseetal . • ImpairedSpineCortactinMovementin Fmr1 KOs J . Neurosci . , May23 , 2012 • 32 ( 21 ) : 7403 – 7413 • 7413