Conservation tool design caught in the midst of transdisciplinary negotiations of data accuracy Sebastian Mukumbira smukumbira @ nust . na Namibia University of Science and Technology Windhoek , Khomas , Namibia Heike Winschiers - Theophilus Namibia University of Science and Technology Windhoek , Namibia hwinschiers @ nust . na Chris Muashekele Namibia University of Science and Technology Windhoek , Namibia Rumbidzai Chitakunye Namibia University of Science and Technology Windhoek , Khomas , Namibia Peter Wandai Namibia University of Science and Technology Windhoek , Khomas , Namibia Vera De Cauwer Namibia University of Science and Technology Windhoek , Khomas , Namibia vdecauwer @ nust . na ABSTRACT In this paper , we describe the challenges of conservation tool design caught in the middle of negotiations of accuracy between natural scientists , indigenous communities and computer scientists . This is contextualised in wildlife activity recordings , plant data collec - tions and map presentations within a transfrontier conservation project in Southern Africa . We adopted a mixed methods approach to investigate data accuracy requirements of a multi - stakeholder col - laboration in data collection and information sharing . Participatory Design activities were conducted with the indigenous communities , in the field , as to ensure tools developed fulfill their expectations . Considering the tools as boundary objects we discuss spatial , the - matic and temporal accuracy in the context of the multi - stakeholder conservation management . We conclude that the co - design of these tools revealed distinct conceptualisations of accuracy which have implications for further conservation tool designs . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI . KEYWORDS Conservationtools , Namibia , Africa , indigenouscommunities , Ovahimba , accuracy ACM Reference Format : Sebastian Mukumbira , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Chris Muashekele , Rumbidzai Chitakunye , Peter Wandai , and Vera De Cauwer . 2021 . Conserva - tion tool design caught in the midst of transdisciplinary negotiations of data accuracy . In 3rd African Human - Computer Interaction Conference ( AfriCHI 2021 ) , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3448696 . 3448699 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique © 2021 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8869 - 6 / 21 / 03 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3448696 . 3448699 1 INTRODUCTION Ecosystem conservation aims at implementing integrated view - points , considering wildlife , natural resources , and sustainable re - sources use , facilitating compromises between environmentalists , developers , scientists , communities , and national agendas . These viewpoints are influenced by the data accessible to the decision makers . Thus appropriate ecosystem management decisions depend on reliable data and crucial information [ 26 ] . In other words , access to accurate data leads to higher quality decisions [ 23 ] in ecosystem management , which requires input from a variety of stakeholders , such as park managers , rangers , government departments , scien - tists , non - governmental organisations , tourists and communities living within these areas . Interdependent ecosystem management requires the collection and accumulation of qualitative and quanti - tative information for use in decision making . Such decisions , while steeped in legality , have to take into consideration the economic , social and biophysical impacts thereof [ 18 ] . This therefore calls for data collection efforts from all relevant stakeholders . In order for data to be effectively collected and information shared amongst a heterogeneous group of stakeholders , common ground has to be sought in terms of what is to be recorded and at what level of accuracy . However , data and accuracy needs and concepts vary amongst stakeholders . Natural scientists rely on ecological concepts to guide ecosystem management actions . They regard ecosystems to be “entities which exist in their own right , have self - organising behaviours which display emergent properties , exhibit a sense of strategy in their own development and possess their own evolu - tionary histories . ” [ 2 ] . These system theorists often find themselves in intellectual conflicts with traditional scientific reductionists who view ecosystems as “informing concepts , helpful for analyses of phenomena that exist in nature only as interacting populations” [ 2 ] . On the other hand , the Ovahimba in Ehi - rovipuka area , west of the Etosha National Park in Namibia , regard an ecosystem as a social - ecological system consisting of human and biophysical systems in two - way feedback interactions [ 8 ] . This sheds light on their view of the integration of people and their environment , em - phasising the interdependent and co - evolutionary nature of the interactions between the Ovahimba and their environment . The residents of Marsabit County living next to the Marsabit forest in 22 AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique Sebastian Mukumbira , et al . Northen Kenya consider provisioning and cultural services to be at the core of their interaction with the forest [ 22 ] . Their utilisation of ecosystem services is strongly based on culture , like the chopping of tree branches instead of the whole tree . Park managers and rangers in the field focus more on protecting biodiversity . They achieve this ecosystem based management by in - tegrating the implementation of regional programs with traditional uses hence maintaining ecosystem integrity [ 25 ] . Collaborating on data collection and sharing amongst stakeholders would aid in maintaining the quality and hence the accuracy of the collected data [ 39 ] . In light of these distinct epistemologies , data collection and pre - sentation tools to be designed and used in jointly managing an ecosystem should therefore cater for the different stakeholders’ conceptualisations of accuracy and functional measurement needs . It is subsequently imperative that the design of these tools should be done in a close collaboration with natural scientists , indigenous community members and other stakeholders . It is assumed that the availability of some information layers at high spatial , thematic and temporal resolutions is leading to an increase in the realism of ecosystem management tools [ 21 ] . In this study , we are concerned with the design and development of conservation tools which account for accuracy requirements of natural scientists and indigenous communities to effectively guide the management of the ecosystem of the Skeleton Coast - Iona Transfrontier Park . This study area covers the Iona National park in South Western Angola , the Skeleton Coast National Park in North Western Namibia together with adjacent conservancies . In Angola there are communities living in the national park while in Namibia the communities live in the conservancies adjacent to the national park . Current tools being used to collect data in some parts of the study area include annual game counts , paper - based event books designed and deployed by the Namibia Association of Commu - nity Based Natural Resources Management Support Organisation ( NACSO ) in collaboration with community game guards [ 30 ] . Com - munity game guards record wildlife event data in these books based on what the community prescribed to be monitored . This leaves the need to also record other data that cover all aspects of a com - prehensive biodiversity monitoring programme [ 30 ] . Information resulting from the analysis of the data recorded in the event books is shared between NACSO , the Namibian Ministry of Environment and Tourism and with the communities . Plant life forms an integral part of an ecosystems but currently there are no known tools being used to collect plant data in the area by community members . Focus has been more on wildlife . In an effort to conduct joint conservation management , data collected as well as aggregated and presented needs to be meaningful and relevant to all stakeholders . Thus we anticipate that digital tools and data presentations co - designed with stakeholders will provide a shared platform facilitating a transdici - plinary dialogue and decision - making , based on data considered sufficiently accurate . Buckley ( 2015 ) defines data accuracy as “the closeness of results of observations to the true values or values accepted as being true . When it comes to geospatial data , two types of accuracy are defined . These are positional accuracy and attribute accuracy . Positional accuracy refers to the difference in geographic location of a feature from its true ground position . Attribute accuracy estimates the truth in terms of capturing the characteristics of a feature” [ 2 ] . These accuracy requirements need to be negotiated among stakehold - ers in order to design appropriate tools that serves the needs of a heterogeneous group of users . The current co - designing of data col - lection and representation tools taking place in the Skeleton Coast - Iona Transfrontier Conservation Area ( TFCA ) under the SCIONA ( Co - designing Conservation Technologies for the Iona - Skeleton Coast Transfrontier Conservation Area ) project presents a perfect opportunity for incorporating stakeholders’ accuracy requirements into the tools’ design . In the following sections , we elaborate on the concept of accu - racy in the context of geographical information systems and among indigenous communities . We further explore challenges and design implications of data collection tools used by heterogeneous users such as scientists and citizens or community members . We then present our study area and stakeholders , followed by our empiri - cal work with communities co - designing technologies for wildlife activity recordings , ethnobotanical data collection and map pre - sentations . Considering the tools as boundary objects we discuss spatial , thematic and temporal accuracy in the context of the multi - stakeholder conservation management and implications for further conservation tool designs . 2 THEORETICAL FRAMING AND RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Concept of accuracy There are several attributes which relate to data quality and hence accuracy . We focused on spatial accuracy , thematic accuracy and temporal accuracy . Data accuracy can not be treated just as an intrinsic category independent of the context in which the data are used hence the need to look at accuracy from the point of view of ecologists and that of the community members . 2 . 1 . 1 Positional Accuracy . The impact of positional accuracy on mapping is dependent on the purpose of the map and hence on the spatial resolution at which the mapping will be conducted [ 39 ] . The spatial accuracy of the occurrence data has to be of comparable accuracy to that of the rest of the environmental data in use . More often than not , game guards record their own position and not that of the observed animal since the animal will not allow the ranger to get close to it [ 40 ] . This positional error has less of an impact on predicting species occurrence at coarse spatial scales like 1km spatial resolution . However management decisions like the translocation of threatened species require species distribution modeling at finer scales like 30m spatial resolution , making the impact of the positional error more significant . 2 . 1 . 2 Thematic Accuracy . From a spatial data point of view , an at - tribute can be defined as a fact about a feature , location or locations on the earth’s surface . The fact can be a measurement resulting from the use of an instrument , an observation or could be an outcome of a consensus such as names given to places . Attribute uncertainty hence thematic accuracy variations occur due to inaccuracies of measuring instruments and interpretation of observations by prac - titioners with different training and interests [ 7 ] . Given that the training of ecologists differs from that of the citizens collecting data for ecologists , target species on which data is to be collected should 23 Conservation tool design caught in the midst of transdisciplinary negotiations of data accuracy AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique be easily identifiable . Between - observer differences and within - observer differences are noted between novice and experienced citizen science participants [ 39 ] . 2 . 1 . 3 Temporal Accuracy . Indigenous knowledge contributed by plant experts and community game guards data contains rich local information that spans a wide temporal spectrum because they , as experts and local sensors [ 7 ] , have long been sensing and accu - mulating knowledge of their respective areas . The time aspect of this knowledge may not be in a form that is readily usable by natu - ral scientists . Citizen science when deployed in reporting wildlife sightings tends to be biased towards animals that are active during the day [ 39 ] . Only when community game guards go on targeted night patrols can sightings of nocturnal animals increase . [ 34 ] de - fine data quality in terms of fitness for intended use . They identify taxonomic identification , date of sighting and time and location as the minimum requirements for the recording of a species sighting . With data quality being regarded as both an attribute of data as well as a process of maintaining data quality , they consider data quality to be “the processes and outcomes of evaluating and improving the utility of data . ” 2 . 2 Conservation Data collection tools for distinct and multiple stakeholders In practice , hybrid data recordings , digital and manual , are done in the absence of existing specialised recording technologies . However , a number of distinct tools have been developed for the purpose of conservation data collection , by different users , such as researchers , conservationists and citizens . Engaging members of the public as contributors to projects in ecology , air pollution , health and as - tronomy , as examples , provides a platform for non - scientists to collaborate with scientists in scientific research . This is referred to as citizen science [ 34 ] . One example of a citizen science based tool is Epicollect . It is a multi data collection mobile application . It was developed by Imperial College London as an open - source platform for varied data collection [ 28 ] . Of late the collection tool is also applied for conservation monitoring purposes . Primarily data that enables the formulation of wildlife and plant distribution maps . A tool of note , Cornell University’s eBird project has collected over 500 million records of bird sightings since its inception in 2002 . These records have been contributed by over 330 000 bird watch - ers in about 250 countries [ 39 ] . The Central Wisconsin Invasives Partnership uses the Great Lakes Early Detection Network app to collect sightings of invasive plants from members of the public . The app enables users to take pictures as well as to map the area were the invasive species is found . Another tool , primarily for wildlife data , is the CyberTracker mobile application [ 14 ] . It was developed in the late 90s . Its primary users are illiterate indigenous hunter gathers , who during their hunting expeditions used the application to gather data about their environment . Despite the well defined and intended uses of the tools , there are several issues regarding their use . Epicollect has a text based user interface , which is not applicable and appropriate for use by indigenous community users [ 19 ] [ 4 ] , who are often illiterate . Similar to EpiCollect , the event book is text based , thus to input the data game guards have to write . Whereas , CyberTracker has a legacy text - based interface which is difficult to configure for use in different contexts [ 6 ] . The same applies to eBird and the Great Lakes Early Detection Network app . The resultant maps from these apps are all in 2D . This poses a challenge for those citizen science participants who have no training in map reading . Thus we aver the above tools as inappropriate . Citizen science is not without its own challenges . The citizens’ lack of training and expertise may result in inconsistent and inaccu - rate data [ 12 ] . [ 12 ] propose the use of an instance - based data model ( IBDM ) . The IBDM shifts focus from a predefined classification to the instance and its set of well defined attributes . Classification , if required , can then be derived from the attributes that are of inter - est at a particular time . For instance , the presence or absence of flowers on a particular plant could infer whether it can thrive in a certain environment or not . To enhance data quality in terms of location accuracy , [ 39 ] suggests the use of 3D geovisualisation to assist citizen science participants to navigate and identify locations on maps . [ 11 ] recorded the citizen science participants’ desire to also col - lect data they find relevant in addition to what the app asks for . Participants in the City of San Jose Environmental Services Water Resources Department , in a field deployment study , requested a comment field to write a description of " what they were seeing " . Participant Centred Design and Agile Development , particularly iterative and incremental processes ensure that the users interests are captured during the design phase . User Interface and Experi - ence Design influences the level of engagement and motivation of participants . The logical flow of steps to be taken when capturing an event influence how participants perform and hence have a bear - ing on the data quality [ 13 ] . To ensure sustained engagement in the project by citizen science participants , the design phase should incorporate plans for the sharing of data and outcomes with the participants . These shared data and outcomes should be at an accu - racy level that is relevant to the participants and in a format that the participants can easily navigate . For users not trained in map reading , 3D representations of their terrain enable them to easily identify known features and help in orientation [ 39 ] . 3 RESEARCH CONTEXT 3 . 1 SCIONA project and study area This study is part of a wider project ( SCIONA project ) whose over - all aim is to strengthen cross - border ecosystem management and wildlife protection by co - designing conservation technologies for the Iona - Skeleton Coast Transfrontier Park of Angola and Namibia . The co - design is being carried out together with park authorities and surrounding communities . The SCIONA project is funded by the European Union and is led by the Namibia University of Sci - ence and Technology in cooperation with the Instituto Superior De Ciencias Da Educacao Da Huila of Angola ( ISCED ) . The study area , as shown in figure 1 , is made up of the Skeleton Coast – Iona National Park TransFrontier Park and four Namibian communal conservancies situated South of Iona National Park : Marienfluss , Orupembe , Okanguati , and Epupa . This area covers part of the North - Western part of Namibia and the South - Western part of Angola . It lies between 11°E and 14°E Longitude and 15°S and 19°S Latitude ( Fig . 1 ) . The total size of this area is 34 , 201 km 2 of which the Iona National Park takes up 15 , 150 km 2 [ 32 ] . 24 AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique Sebastian Mukumbira , et al . Figure 1 : SCIONA Study Area The average annual rainfall varies from West to East starting from 0mm in the West to 450mm in the North - East [ 5 ] . Sparse as these figures might indicate , the area still houses a variety of wildlife including giraffe , elephants , desert lions , hyenas , leopards , cheetahs and the black faced impala amongst others . It is also home to a diverse collection of plants such as the resilient Welwitschia Mirabilis and the poisonous Euphorbia Damarana . 3 . 2 Stakeholders in Study Area The key stakeholders in the TFCA include the respective ministries of environment and tourism represented by park managers and game rangers , natural scientists , indigenous communities living in the area and Non Governmental Organisations ( NGOs ) working in the area . Considering the heterogeneity of these stakeholders , there is a great need to foster a collective understanding , and integration , within and between these stakeholders . 3 . 2 . 1 Government and NGO’s . During the 1970s , wildlife popu - lations in the Kunene region declined drastically due to severe droughts and heavy poaching . Non Governmental Organisations ( NGOs ) working in the area then formed a community game guard system to report on game numbers and any suspicious activity . The game guards reported to the headmen . The NGO’s paid the game guards who were appointed the headmen . The headmen would then report to the government any major poaching incidents [ 10 ] . This led to the birth of the Namibian Ministry of Environment and Tourism’s policy on community conservancies . This led to the establishment of conservancy committees which provide a formal structure for engaging with communities . These formal structures are not in place in the Iona National Park but provide a launch pad for replication on the Angolan side . 3 . 2 . 2 Indigenous community members . The area is inhabited by the semi - nomadic Ovahimba people . The Ovahimba constitute one percent of the Namibian population , 23 000 based on an estimated 2 . 3 million population [ 20 ] . Their livelihoods are traditionally based on livestock farming and small - scale cultivation of maize , pumpkin and melons on the alluvial soils along the Kunene river [ 3 ] . There has been increased involvement of the Ovahimba people in other economic activities such as trade in non - timber resources , craft making , and ecotourism . The SCIONA project is enlisting the help of community members as para - ecologists . These para - ecologists will act as " sensors " to collect scientific data [ 34 ] . 3 . 2 . 3 Research team . The technical multi - disciplinary research team consists of five male and three female affiliated with the Namibia University of Science and Technology and one community co - design expert from Otjisa village in Kunene . One researcher is an ecologist and two are computer scientists , specialised in co - designing technologies with indigenous communities . Two PhD candidates are focusing on data accuracy and early warning sys - tems , respectively . Three master candidates with one focusing on the deploying of telecommunication infrastructure in the study area while the other two are developing the plant data collection app and the data sharing platform respectively . Joint field trips have been undertaken to ensure integration of the different activities and technologies . 3 . 3 Project goal A critical aspect of data collection is its intended use , and as such , how it is processed and presented determines what actions or lack thereof , that will be carried out based on the data and its accuracy . Based on the wildlife and plant data collected , a web - based portal that retrieves text , geolocation , audio and visual data has been de - termined to be the most suitable approach , by the research team , to present information to the various user groups affiliated with the Conservation project . Categorizing the user groups is dictated by the type of data required by each , in order to fulfill their require - ments . The Ovahimba community members residing within the TFCA have been determined to be the primary user group with which all wildlife and plant data collected , should be appropriated back to . As such community sessions served to be an integral com - ponent to collect information . The expectations encompass , the type of data , map layouts , usability and navigation . 3 . 4 Community - based co - design approach An all encompassing approach is needed when developing tech - nologies to be used by a heterogeneous group of stakeholders and where accuracy levels are to be determined . We have deployed a 25 Conservation tool design caught in the midst of transdisciplinary negotiations of data accuracy AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique community - based co - design ( CBCD ) approach , as conceptualised by [ 36 ] , based and refined on empirical work with indigenous and marginalised communities in Namibia and Malaysia [ 37 ] , framed withinananAfrocentricresearchparadigm [ 17 ] andUbuntu - inspired epistemology [ 31 ] . Methodologically CBCD is derived from action research , situated and striving for real life workable and transferable solutions , and Participatory design ensuring the involvement of previously excluded user , such as indigenous communities . Thereby within the technology co - design process accuracy requirements can be determined and meanings are negotiated . [ 36 ] urge that participatory design approaches , which in this case refers to co - design , need to account not only for diversity between individual people and groups but also for cultural variations and dynamics . These variations and dynamics , especially in a inter - cultural con - text , through user involvement , should include an appropriation of the design process itself rather than ethnographically based choices . This design approach is fundamentally important , given the tech - nological eloquence divide that resides amongst the community members and the researchers . By facilitating co - design activities , engaging the community members provides the researcher with an understanding of the perceptions of the focus group with re - gard to scenarios presented . [ 26 ] adopt CBCD as a methodology that gives a voice to the marginalised while remaining sensitive to the values and culture of the communities in which the tech - nology will be deployed . To ensure effective engagements with communities , it is important to identify influential people within the community who can act as champions [ 26 ] . The conservancies of Okanguati , Marienfluss , Epupa and Orupembe have committees and game guards in place hence the choice to engage with the game guards as an interface with the communities . The game guards then help by identifying plant experts within their communities . Considering the heterogeneity of the stakeholders , We employed Participatory Design ( PD ) techniques together with action research . The PD methods helped in capturing the needs and requirements of the users while action research guided our participatory sessions with the game guards and plant experts [ 1 ] . 3 . 5 Prototypes as boundary objects Since we were interacting with various stakeholders with common as well as divergent interests , we deployed prototypes of data col - lection and representation tools to serve as boundary objects in the negotiation of accuracy . This was premised on [ 29 ] acknowledge - ment of the heterogeneity of scientific work hence the need for cooperation amongst multiple actors to ensure the success of the work [ 29 ] . Boundary objects provide the plasticity to be adaptable across multiple views while maintaining their identity despite later changes in form [ 27 ] . Works by [ 27 ] reveal that participants : ( 1 ) cooperate without having good models of each other’s work ; ( 2 ) successfully work together while employing different units of analysis , methods of aggregating data , and different ab - stractions of data ; ( 3 ) cooperate while having different goals , time horizons , and audiences to satisfy . The concept of a boundary objects has also been deployed success - fully in describing how to bridge between different domains such as cognitive psychology and HCI or Software Engineering [ 33 ] . 4 ACCURACY NEGOTIATIONS AROUND THE TOOL DEVELOPMENT We illustrate the conceptualisations of accuracy and consequent measuring tool needs of scientists and community members in three cases , namely for wildlife data , plant data and mapping . 4 . 1 Plant data accuracy To understand the concept of data accuracy required for ethnob - otanical data and vegetation monitoring at ecosystem level , in - formation was collected from a scientist . A first prototype of the plant collection tool was then developed using the collected require - ments . It was evaluated in the field with members of the Epupa and Okanguati communities . This was then followed by focus group discussions to gather the communities’ concepts of relevant plant information and related data accuracy . 4 . 1 . 1 Ecologist’s requirements . Data requirements for vegetation monitoring were focused on woody vegetation . For each tree or shrub monitored , data collection should include information on : ge - ographical location , date and time , name of plant in native language , image of the plant , breast height , circumference of main trunk , num - ber of stems below breast height , slope , phenology , health status , soil information that is colour and texture , 10 neighbouring plants within 5m radius that is 5 trees and 5 grass or shrub and leaf infor - mation . The leaf information is useful because it is needed to verify the tree identification , check the health status recorded , check the phenology recorded , and finally , the size of the leaf is a good indi - cator for plant physiology . Besides the type of plant data , accuracy issues were also discussed , these included accuracy in terms of distance during the collection process , accuracy in terms of plant location and time of collection and accuracy in terms of plant re - generation and distribution . During the plant collection process a systematic approach was to be followed in which the distance between the current main plant being recorded and the next main plant should be 20 metres . Another example of accuracy in terms of location and time was the attachment of GPS coordinates , date and time on the image of the plant so as to know the exact location of the plant and the particular time of the year to know the season and the time of the day . To understand the synecology and distribution of plants in the study area there was need to record the accurate data of neighbouring plants within a 5 metre radius of the plant being recorded and the type of soil . 4 . 1 . 2 Plant Data Collection Tools . The developed application was text based with icons for identification of some of the text fields . The plant application captures the image of the plant as well as the location of the tree when a picture of the soil beneath the tree is captured so as to deduce soil information . The picture of the leaf is captured so as to confirm the identity of the plant as well as to ascertain its health . The app captures the number of stems below breast height as shown in figure 2 . Figure 3 shows the details that the app captures about the main plant’s five nearest woody neighbours . Ecologists need the app to also capture tree height , thickness at breast level ( see Figure 4 . ) and the slope of the land . Tree height is determined by first pointing at the bottom of the tree followed by tilting the phone until the top most part of the tree is in sight . See figure 5 . The slope of the land is captured by first placing 26 AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique Sebastian Mukumbira , et al . Figure 2 : Plant App : Adding Main Plant . the phone horizontally and then tilting it to be parallel with the ground . 4 . 1 . 3 Community concepts of Plant data accuracy . We used the plant app prototype to start a conversation with the Ovahimba on what data they find relevant when it comes to plants . Measuring the tree height using the app proved to be a challenge . Figure 5 shows the measuring of the tree height . Height readings from the app were not consistent and varied from user to user . As part of thematic accuracy , the Ovahimba expressed that it is not enough to just name a tree . Pertaining to woody neighbours they went one abstraction layer down to highlight likely neighbours to certain trees . A prominent example was the case of the Mopane tree ( Omu - tati ) which is closely associated with the Purple - pod Terminalia ( Omuhama ) tree . The use of the tree is very important in describing it . The Ovahimba look at the beauty of the tree in terms of how tall , how straight it is and the potential use like as a walking stick or for medicine . The presence of insects on trees also add to their beauty , Figure 3 : Woody neighbour details . for example honeybees . Those trees with holes or fallen , attract snakes hence one has to be careful around them . The distance of the woody neighbours to the main tree has significance towards the abundance of goat food . Neighbours too far apart imply less food for the goats . This then determines whether an area is ideal for settlements or not . 4 . 2 Wildlife data accuracy Wildlife scientists determined data needs to inform the integrated ecosystem management plan . Considering that a paper - based data collection tool , namely the event book was already established , it served as a point of departure to be scrutinised for accuracy requirements . Upon identification of weaknesses in regard to data accuracy , a wildlife activity recording ( WAR ) app was co - designed with local community members , over a period of one year [ 19 ] . The app was then discussed further with other stakeholders . 27 Conservation tool design caught in the midst of transdisciplinary negotiations of data accuracy AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique Figure 4 : Measuring the thickness of a tree trunk . Figure 5 : Measuring tree height . 4 . 2 . 1 Current practices versus data needs . At the beginning of our project we engaged wildlife scientists in order to gain insight into the type of wildlife data that they require for their scientific ex - plorations and observations in the study area . Primarily the data required was wildlife metadata such as type of species identified , number of species and geographical location . Also , we probed the wildlife scientists about the format in which the metadata ought to be . As well as the degrees of accuracy for the required metadata . Of particular interest to the ecology scientists is the location in which a particular wildlife species was sighted . This information allows scientists to formulate movement patterns , as well as distri - bution maps and graphs . Which are used to inform decision making and strategy formulation [ 15 ] . However , due to inadequacies in the event book’s use , there are many data gaps [ 19 ] , and inaccuracies from an ecological stand point . At the moment , the wildlife mapping is being carried out at a coarse spatial resolution of a 2000m x 2000m grid for game counts and event books . This is the resolution prescribed by the conservation experts , but insufficient for wildlife scientists . This gives a very coarse location especially for those species which do not have a large home range . Since most of the event book users can not read or write , the capturing of the correct date of an incident is compromised . The event book does not capture the time an incident is observed which denies ecologists the ability to infer animal behaviour in terms of nocturnal , diurnal , crepuscular and cathemeral behaviour . 4 . 2 . 2 Wildlife Data Collection Tools . In our quest to develop appro - priate wildlife data collection tools we engaged , through co - design , community game guards . There were several requirements that the game guards deemed imperative for adequate and accurate data collection . They insisted that the tools should have a camera and voice recording feature which is tied to each thematic category they collect . Thus instead of writing , they take a picture or verbal recording of an incident . Primarily because through writing they often describe incidents partially , thus repeatedly missing out on scientifically relevant data . The majority of recordings in the event book do not have a recorded date nor a precise GPS location of occurrence . The game guards state that they do not see any relevance in having a specific date , time or location , as to them what is most relevant is an in - telligible description of an incident . The data that is disregarded by the game guards such as location is often relevant for wildlife scientists . Hence , in the WAR application we incorporated an auto - mated GPS location , time and date capture each time an incident is recorded . To test the accuracy of the WAR application , we carried out five location - based experiments . Whereby we recorded several locations with a hand - held GPS device and the WAR application . Figure 6 shows a dead zebra . Stating the presence or absence of stripes on the zebra’s belly and the observation of a dewlap on its throat would lead ecologists to conclude that it is a mountain zebra . Figure 7 shows the WAR app interface . We calculated the differen - tial between the data sets from each medium , through which we established that the accuracy of the WAR application is appropriate . Figure 6 : Mountain Zebra Mortality . 4 . 2 . 3 Accuracy in Wildlife Data Collection . During co - design ses - sions with the communities , participants expressed that the sight - ings of predators need to be at a higher accuracy e . g at so - and - so’s kraal . The temporal recordings also need to be more precise consid - ering that most predators cover a long distance in a short space of 28 AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique Sebastian Mukumbira , et al . Figure 7 : WAR App Interface . time . A female cheetah covers an average of 8km in a day while a male one can go up to 39km in a day [ 9 ] . The Ovahimba associate current sightings with previous sightings , giving a wide temporal spectrum . Having lived in the area for longer they have observed patterns . " It was seen here then there then that side . " Hence they pro - vide both sensed and accumulated knowledge . Thematic : Wildlife experts differentiate between plain zebras and mountain zebras . Meanwhile the Ovahimba refer to both types of zebras as Ongoro . Where physical differences are more defined like in the case of a brown hyena ( otjinduri ) and a spotted hyena ( ombungu ) , both sets of stakeholders clearly differentiate between the sub - species . 4 . 3 Maps and aggregated data presentations In regard to presentation of data and mapping , participatory map - ping sessions were conducted with the communities at Marienfluss , Orupembe and Epupa . The communities’ perception of distance and terrain representation were recorded . As observed by Skarlatidou et . al . , lower literacy users understand better , hand - drawn , semi abstract graphics which incorporate action cues [ 24 ] . We presented the Ovahimba with 2D as well as 3D images of their respective areas . We then asked them to identify any features that they can recognise from the maps . This was preceded by asking them to identify the meeting spot on the maps as shown in figure 8 . They managed to identify features faster on 2D images as compared to 3D ones . Preferred base maps , symbology and colours were then noted for each set of participants . Figure 8 : Okanguati Map Co - design Activity . 4 . 3 . 1 Community Accuracy requirements in Data Presentation . The role of other factors such as local traditions , exposure to other forms of digital representations and symbolic literacies can not be ignored [ 34 ] This was brought to the fore by the Ovahimba closely associating features with the colour of soils in the surrounding areas . They emphasised that the colours used on base maps should be the same as the respective colours of the soils . Upon establishing whether the maps were readable , the members were asked to iden - tify defined locations as they understand them in their local context . This implied the naming of prominent rivers , landmarks such as mountains and homesteads . It is important to note that within the Ovahimba context , directions are defined by landmarks and not geolocation data . Therefore , by understanding their approach to defining map layouts and reading , identifying incident locations becomes more simplified in their context , and as such easier to derive those perceptions into the portal’s maps for presentation with respect to them being the primary audience . As such , geolocation data collected from the WAR and Plant apps during field excursions was compared to the location of the incidents based on labelling by the community members . In Epupa , 29 Conservation tool design caught in the midst of transdisciplinary negotiations of data accuracy AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique Figure 9 : Epupa Map Layout Prototype . the WAR App was used to capture the sighting of a dead crocodile on the Kunene river . It was also used to capture the positions of two camera traps , placed earlier by the research team with the help of game guides . The plant app was used to capture data on a 500m transact . Figure 9 shows the resultant map from the activities at Epupa . Participants were presented with various choices of sym - bols to represent features such as trees and camera traps . They recommended the use of graphics to augment text . 5 DISCUSSION Observations recorded during the engagements with the various stakeholders point to considerations for technology design given the different accuracy requirements . The implications for park man - agers , ecologists , community members and participatory design are visited . 5 . 1 Implications for Spatial Accuracy While the abstract location data ( in form of coordinates ) is of im - portance to ecology scientists , the location description relative to a known place as well as place names are meaningful to local com - munity members . Known places are identified by names , as well as recognised landscape markers . From a technological perspective , it is easy to capture GPS coordinates when taking a photo using smartphones . Thus capturing the location of an incident , by auto - matically linking it to the capturing of a photograph , satisfies all stakeholder needs in regard to spatial accuracy . The coordinates can point to names of places and known landscape markers of which the coordinates where captured previously . The accuracy is then dependent on the hardware in use and satellite geometry at the time . This is more applicable for plants since they are stationary and easy to photograph . Wildlife sightings , especially predators and big game present challenges in that predators are quite elu - sive . On the other hand certain species like antelope are difficult to photograph at close range . Photographing foot prints presents an alternative with regard to predators . For a more accurate in - terpretation of photographs , [ 16 ] recommend placing a precision scale next to the footprint when the photograph is taken . Reference footprints can then be used as a comparison . We propose that this would improve location accuracy compared to the current scenario with event books whereby those game guards who can not write wait until they meet with those who can write before an incident is recorded into the event book . In instances where circumstances like a flat battery prevent a game guard from taking a photograph for example , the tools should enable the recording of an oral de - scription of the incident at a later stage . The coordinates would then be deduced from the description of the location relative to a known place . Species distribution modelling ( SDM ) requires the overlaying of location information with other environmental data . To achieve good model performance the datasets used should be at fine spatial resolutions including positional accuracy hence the need to collect location data at a high accuracy to integrate it with 30m resolution elevation data for example [ 40 ] . 5 . 2 Implications for Thematic Accuracy Wildlife attribute data in cases of zebra sightings by community members is captured at a more general taxonomic level than genus or species . As alluded to earlier , recording attributes of certain species would aid in identifying then at species level . Adopting the instance - based data model would enable community game guards to describe the attributes of species to a level that would enable the ecologists to identify them . The voice recording feature on the WAR app should cater for a delayed recording as well since noises can scare away some animals . The use of the plant app was more difficult to learn for commu - nity members due to the use of text and icons which they could not easily relate to . The complexity of the app had an impact on the accuracy of height and slope readings . [ 35 ] propose the use of a family of apps instead of just one app as app complexity may contribute to confusion among new users leading to inaccuracy . Observations in the field included the fact that community plant experts were eager to give more information than what the fields in the plant app were asking for . In most instances the interviewer would move to the next attribute while the plant expert still needed to give more information . From this observation one would argue that form based data collection limits the amount of information that one can record while the community members are left eager to give more information that the app can take . Free video collection would therefore provide the community plant experts with a plat - form to fully give the information at the accuracy level they deem to be suitable for the particular species . An example is the mopane tree . Other than just height , trunk thickness and phenology , community plant expert expressed their reverence of the role the mopane tree plays in their life . This varied from shelter for humans , shelter for livestock to medicinal use . Therefore , the database , linked to the app , in which the data will be stored , should be able to support the form based collected data as well as the freely recorded video data . This is in order to create a holistic ethnobotanical knowledge base encompassing scientific data records with indigenous knowledge . 5 . 3 Implications for Temporal Accuracy The date and time of the apps are set to synchronise with the satellites’ date and time , presenting a platform to have comparable date and time stamps across incidents recorded by different devices 30 AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique Sebastian Mukumbira , et al . and data collectors . Accurate dates and times of incidence would contribute to the better understanding of animal behaviour in terms of what time they are more active . The recording of incidents into the event book way after they have been observed leads to the loss of temporal accuracy . Plant flowers play a significant role in the identification of plant species in terms of the way the flower looks and which time of the year it is in bloom . Therefore temporal accuracy becomes of paramount importance in helping the species identification process . From the ecologists we observed that the type of plant data they need is mostly on how the plants fit within the ecosystem , how the vegetation relates to the rest of their environment by knowing the growing patterns of plants within a particular area , also knowing the type of plants which grow close by and in a particular type of soil and the regeneration patterns of plants . From the community we also observed that the type of plant data they need is the data which makes up the beauty of the tree . According to the factors which makes up the beauty of the tree , most of them can be use related . Hence from the difference of the plant data accuracy requirements from both stakeholders there is need to negotiate accuracy between different stakeholders . Therefore the resultant tool should be able to record record the correct date and time so that the correct stages of plant life cycles can be inferred from the collected data . This can then inform use , harvesting as well as the most ideal times for ethnobotanical walks . The data collection tools should also enable the recording of an incident after it has passed . This can be through a video or an audio recording detailing when exactly the incident happened . The date and time can then be deduced from there . With regards to data presentation on the portal and the accuracy of that data with respect to the various stakeholders involved , it is of particular importance to highlight that each group’s perspec - tive highly differs from the next based on interpretation . A specific example would be how certain geographic locations within the com - munity members’ context are determined by soil colour and type , to which a location is named after and as such identified on the map . Furthermore , other geographical elements such as rivers , tributaries and streams are identified and represented quite vastly between each user group . Other stakeholders such as geologists affiliated with the project would ideally define a location in a completely different manner and thus , shift the context in a different direction . The disparity that exists between the various stakeholders based on geology inclines the need for a geoportal that will make use of Web Map Services to dynamically generate maps from the stored data [ 38 ] . The contents of the maps will be determined by selecting the layers of interest . The base maps on which these layers will be overlaid will be dependent on the stakeholder involved enabling the generation of maps for specific stakeholders . 6 CONCLUSION This research examines data collection and distribution tools avail - able to support ecosystem management . Recommendations are put forward for the design of tools that would cater for diverse accuracy requirements . Prototypes as boundary objects have shown to be useful in negotiating accuracy and informing further tool develop - ment . They were used in this study that engaged a diverse group of stakeholders to incorporate their view into the design of data collec - tion and distribution tools . Participatory design approaches were employed in creating tools for an integrated ecosystem manage - ment plan for the Iona - Skeleton Coast Transfrontier Park of Angola and Namibia . Observations showed that participatory design leads to the creation of artefacts that can satisfy the requirements of a diverse group of stakeholders . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work is funded by the EU under the SCIONA project ( Euro - peAid / 156423 / DD / ACT / Multi ) . Our gratitude goes to the NGOs , ecologists , park managers , rangers and the Ovahimba communities who allow us to share in their space and knowledge time and time again . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Edwin Blake and William Tucker . 2006 . Socially aware software engineering for the developing world . IST - Africa 2006 Conference Proceedings , ( 2006 ) , . [ 2 ] David Buckley . 2019 . GIS Introduction . http : / / planet . botany . uwc . ac . za / nisl / GIS / GIS _ primer / page _ 08 . htm [ 3 ] Andrew Corbett . 1999 . A Case Study on the Proposed Epupa Hydro Power Dam in Namibia . World Commission on Dams , Cape Town , South Africa , ( 1999 ) , . [ 4 ] Vladimir Dyo , Stephen A Ellwood , David W Macdonald , Andrew Markham , Cecilia Mascolo , Bence Pásztor , Salvatore Scellato , Niki Trigoni , Ricklef Wohlers , and Kharsim Yousef . 2010 . Evolution and sustainability of a wildlife monitoring sensornetwork . In Proceedingsofthe8thACMConferenceonEmbeddedNetworked Sensor Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , United States , Zurich , 127 – 140 . [ 5 ] Stephen E Fick and Robert J Hijmans . 2017 . WorldClim 2 : new 1 - km spatial reso - lution climate surfaces for global land areas . International journal of climatology 37 , 12 ( 2017 ) , 4302 – 4315 . [ 6 ] Eric Gilbert , Karrie Karahalios , and Christian Sandvig . 2010 . The network in the garden : Designing social media for rural life . American Behavioral Scientist 53 , 9 ( 2010 ) , 1367 – 1388 . [ 7 ] Michael F Goodchild . 1995 . Attribute accuracy . Elements of spatial data qual - ity , ( 1995 ) , 59 – 79 . [ 8 ] Arthur Hoole and Fikret Berkes . 2010 . Breaking down fences : Recoupling social – ecological systems for biodiversity conservation in Namibia . Geoforum 41 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 304 – 317 . [ 9 ] AnnMarie Houser , Michael J Somers , and Lorraine K Boast . 2009 . Home range use of free - ranging cheetah on farm and conservation land in Botswana . African Journal of Wildlife Research 39 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 11 – 22 . [ 10 ] Brian TB Jones . 1999 . Policy lessons from the evolution of a community - based approach to wildlife management , Kunene Region , Namibia . Journal of Inter - national Development : The Journal of the Development Studies Association 11 , 2 ( 1999 ) , 295 – 304 . [ 11 ] Sunyoung Kim , Christine Robson , Thomas Zimmerman , Jeffrey Pierce , and Eben M Haber . 2011 . Creek watch : pairing usefulness and usability for suc - cessful citizen science . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , United States , Vancouver , 2125 – 2134 . [ 12 ] RomanLukyanenko , JeffreyParsons , andYolandaWiersma . 2011 . Citizenscience 2 . 0 : Data management principles to harness the power of the crowd . In Inter - national Conference on Design Science Research in Information Systems . Springer , Springer , Berlin , 465 – 473 . [ 13 ] Soledad Luna , Margaret Gold , Alexandra Albert , Luigi Ceccaroni , Bernat Clara - munt , Olha Danylo , Muki Haklay , Renzo Kottmann , Christopher Kyba , Jaume Piera , et al . 2018 . Developing mobile applications for environmental and biodi - versity citizen science : considerations and recommendations . In Multimedia tools and applications for environmental & biodiversity informatics . Springer , 9 – 30 . [ 14 ] Andrew Maunder , Gary Marsden , Dominic Gruijters , and Edwin Blake . 2007 . De - signing interactive systems for the developing world - reflections on user - centred design . In 2007 International Conference on Information and Communication Tech - nologies and Development . IEEE , 1 – 8 . [ 15 ] PD Meek , G Ballard , A Claridge , R Kays , K Moseby , T O’brien , A O’connell , J Sanderson , DE Swann , M Tobler , et al . 2014 . Recommended guiding principles for reporting on camera trapping research . Biodiversity and conservation 23 , 9 ( 2014 ) , 2321 – 2343 . [ 16 ] Cheryl A Mills , Brendan J Godley , and David J Hodgson . 2016 . Take only pho - tographs , leave only footprints : novel applications of non - invasive survey meth - odsforrapiddetection ofsmall , arboreal animals . PloS one 11 , 1 ( 2016 ) , e0146142 . 31 Conservation tool design caught in the midst of transdisciplinary negotiations of data accuracy AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique [ 17 ] QueenethMkabela . 2005 . UsingtheAfrocentricmethodinresearchingindigenous African culture . The qualitative report 10 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 178 . [ 18 ] H Todd Mowrer . 1997 . Decision support systems for ecosystem management : an evaluation of existing systems . Vol . 296 . DIANE Publishing . [ 19 ] ChrisMuashekele , HeikeWinschiers - Theophilus , andGereonKochKapuire . 2019 . Co - Design as a Means of Fostering Appropriation of Conservation Monitoring Technology by Indigenous Communities . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communities and Technologies - Transforming Communities . 126 – 130 . [ 20 ] MaariaNiskala . 2015 . EncounteringtheOther : TheOvahimbaCultureandPeople in Namibian Tourism Promotion . Nordic Journal of African Studies 24 , 3 & 4 ( 2015 ) , 259 – 278 . [ 21 ] Bertram Ostendorf . 2011 . Overview : spatial information and indicators for sustainable management of natural resources . Ecological Indicators 11 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 97 – 102 . [ 22 ] Caroline A Ouko , Richard Mulwa , Robert Kibugi , Margaret A Owuor , Julie G Zaehringer , and Nicholas O Oguge . 2018 . Community perceptions of ecosys - tem services and the management of Mt . Marsabit Forest in Northern Kenya . Environments 5 , 11 ( 2018 ) , 121 . [ 23 ] Ganesan Shankaranarayanan and Yu Cai . 2006 . Supporting data quality manage - ment in decision - making . Decision support systems 42 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 302 – 317 . [ 24 ] Artemis Skarlatidou , Monika Suškevičs , Claudia Göbel , Baiba Pr¯use , Loreta Taug - inien˙e , Andre Mascarenhas , Marzia Mazzonetto , Alice Sheppard , Judy Barrett , Muki Haklay , et al . 2019 . The value of stakeholder mapping to enhance co - creation in citizen science initiatives . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice 4 , 1 ( 2019 ) . [ 25 ] D Scott Slocombe . 1993 . Implementing ecosystem - based management . BioScience 43 , 9 ( 1993 ) , 612 – 622 . [ 26 ] Fiona Ssozi - Mugarura , Edwin Blake , and Ulrike Rivett . 2016 . Supporting com - munity needs for rural water management through community - based co - design . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Full papers - Volume 1 . 91 – 100 . [ 27 ] Susan Leigh Star . 1989 . The structure of ill - structured solutions : Boundary objects and heterogeneous distributed problem solving . In Distributed artificial intelligence . Elsevier , 37 – 54 . [ 28 ] Markus D Steinberg . 2019 . Software solutions for form - based collection of data andthesemanticenrichmentofformdata . arXivpreprintarXiv : 1901 . 11053 ( 2019 ) . [ 29 ] Sveta Stoytcheva . 2013 . Boundary objects : a field guide . [ 30 ] Greg Stuart - Hill , Richard Diggle , Bevan Munali , Jo Tagg , and David Ward . 2005 . The event book system : a community - based natural resource monitoring system from Namibia . Biodiversity & Conservation 14 , 11 ( 2005 ) , 2611 – 2631 . [ 31 ] LeylaTavernaro - Haidarian . 2018 . Deliberativeepistemology : Towardsanubuntu - based epistemology that accounts for a priori knowledge and objective truth . SouthAfricanJournalofPhilosophy 37 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 229 – 242 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02580136 . 2018 . 1470374 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02580136 . 2018 . 1470374 [ 32 ] IUCN UNEP - WCMC . 2019 . Marine protected planet . Cambridge , UK : UNEP9WCMC and IUCN ( 2019 ) . [ 33 ] AndrewWalenstein . 2003 . FindingBoundaryObjectsinSEandHCI : AnApproach Through Engineering - oriented Design Theories . . In ICSE Workshop on SE - HCI . Citeseer , 92 – 99 . [ 34 ] Andrea Wiggins and Kevin Crowston . 2015 . Surveying the citizen science land - scape . First Monday 20 , 1 - 5 ( 2015 ) . [ 35 ] Andrea Wiggins and Yurong He . 2016 . Community - based data validation prac - tices in citizen science . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on computer - supported cooperative work & social computing . 1548 – 1559 . [ 36 ] Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Nicola J Bidwell , and Edwin Blake . 2012 . Altering participation through interactions and reflections in design . CoDesign 8 , 2 - 3 ( 2012 ) , 163 – 182 . [ 37 ] Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Tariq Zaman , and Colin Stanley . 2017 . A classifi - cation of cultural engagements in community technology design : introducing a transcultural approach . AI & SOCIETY ( 6 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00146 - 017 - 0739 - y [ 38 ] Chuanrong Zhang and Weidong Li . 2005 . The roles of web feature and web map services in real - time geospatial data sharing for time - critical applications . Cartography and Geographic Information Science 32 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 269 – 283 . [ 39 ] Guiming Zhang . 2019 . Integrating citizen science and GIS for wildlife habitat assessment . In Wildlife population monitoring . IntechOpen . [ 40 ] Guiming Zhang , A - Xing Zhu , Zhi - Pang Huang , and Wen Xiao . 2018 . A heuristic - based approach to mitigating positional errors in patrol data for species distribu - tion modeling . Transactions in GIS 22 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 202 – 216 . 32