Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 ZDM Mathematics Education ( 2017 ) 49 : 497 – 507 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11858 - 017 - 0857 - 5 ORIGINAL ARTICLE Using analogies to facilitate conceptual change in mathematics learning Xenia Vamvakoussi 1 Accepted : 21 March 2017 / Published online : 27 March 2017 © FIZ Karlsruhe 2017 breaks , no matter how much it is stressed” ) with the aim of bringing the notion of density within the grasp of second - ary students . Keywords Conceptual change · Rational numbers · Analogies · Bridging analogies 1 Introduction The relation between psychology and mathematics educa - tion has been long standing . Many psychologists turned to mathematics as an appropriate domain to put theories of learning and development to the test – one can think of Thorndike and Piaget , for example . On the other hand , mathematics education researchers turned to psychology for theoretical accounts of mathematics learning that could , for example , explain students’ difficulties in mathematics , describe the processes underlying mathematical reasoning and problem solving , and predict contextual influences on learners’ mathematical behaviour ( e . g . , task features that elicit different responses ) ( Schoenfeld 1987 ) . However , the relation between psychology and math - ematics education has not been uncontested . For example , it has been argued that psychological theories are misinter - preted and misapplied in the context of mathematics educa - tion ( see , for example , Anderson et al . 2000 ) . On the other hand , mathematics education researchers came to see the cognitive perspective as too restricted and failing to capture the complex phenomena of learning and teaching math - ematics in the classroom ; furthermore , the research agenda of the field broadened to include topics such as the socio - political context of learning and teaching mathematics that do not usually pertain to psychological research ( Kil - patrick 2014 ) . On top of that , in their attempts to establish Abstract The problem of adverse effects of prior knowl - edge in mathematics learning has been amply documented and theorized by mathematics educators as well as cogni - tive / developmental psychologists . This problem emerges when students’ prior knowledge about a mathematical notion comes in contrast with new information coming from instruction , giving rise to systematic errors . Concep - tual change perspectives on mathematics learning suggest that in such cases reorganization of students’ prior knowl - edge is necessary . Analogical reasoning , in particular cross - domain mapping , is considered an important mech - anism for conceptual restructuring . However , the use of analogies in instruction is often found ineffective , mainly because the structural similarity between two domains is obscure for students . To deal with this problem , John Clem - ent and his colleagues developed the bridging strategy that uses multiple analogies to bring students to pay attention to the structural similarity that often goes unnoticed . This paper focuses on the cross - domain mapping between num - ber and the ( geometrical ) line that has been instrumental in the development of the number concept . I summarize findings of a series of studies that investigated students’ understandings of density in arithmetical and geometrical contexts from a conceptual change perspective ; and I dis - cuss how this research - based evidence was used to design an intervention study that used the analogy “numbers are points on the number line” , and a bridging analogy ( “the number line is like an imaginary rubber band that never * Xenia Vamvakoussi xvamvak @ cc . uoi . gr 1 Department of Early Childhood Education , University of Ioannina , Building : Metavatiko , University Campus , 45110 Ioannina , Greece 498 X . Vamvakoussi 1 3 mathematics education as a scientific discipline in its own right , mathematics education researchers set to develop their own theoretical models and research methodolo - gies , turning away from cognitive psychology ( De Smedt and Verschaffel 2010 ) . As a result , there is currently great discrepancy between the research foci of psychology and mathematics education even when it comes to mathemat - ics thinking and learning , where larger overlap could be expected ( Berch 2016 ) . Recently , however , there appears to be a renewed interest in bridging research on mathemati - cal cognition and development , and mathematics education ( e . g . , Alcock et al . 2016 ) . In this article I attempt to illustrate the possibility of pro - ductive bridging between psychological and educational research . I will present an overview of a series of stud - ies that investigated students’ understanding of the dense ordering ( hereafter , density ) of rational numbers . These studies were grounded on a conceptual change approach to learning ( Vosniadou et al . 2008 ) , taking a cognitive - devel - opmental perspective on the acquisition of rational number knowledge . They resulted in the design of an experimen - tal intervention that systematically employed principles for instruction stemming from conceptual change perspec - tives on learning , notably the use of bridging analogies and other analogies to foster students’ understanding of a highly counter - intuitive idea . I will highlight the relevance of such studies for mathematics education while also discussing their limitations from the point of view of instruction . 2 The problem of conceptual change in the development of rational number knowledge One of the most well - established findings coming from research on learning in the fields of psychology and edu - cation is that prior knowledge plays a very important role in further learning . Attempts have been made to communi - cate insights about this issue also to educators ( Bransford et al . 2000 ; Donovan and Bransford 2005 ) . Of particular interest are the adverse effects of prior knowledge . These typically occur when the new content to be learnt is incom - patible with what the learner already knows . In such cases prior knowledge hinders rather than supports new under - standings . An exemplary case is the transition from natu - ral to non - natural numbers . Interference of natural number knowledge in rational number learning has been studied by mathematics educators ( e . g . , Brousseau 2002 ; Fisch - bein 1987 ; Moss 2005 ) as well as by cognitive and devel - opmental psychologists ( e . g . , Hartnett and Gelman 1998 ; Smith et al . 2005 ) , and has recently attracted the attention of neuro - psychologists as well ( e . g . , Jacob et al . 2012 ) . This phenomenon is so pervasive that it has been termed whole or natural number bias ( Ni and Zhou 2005 ; Vam - vakoussi et al . 2012 ) . The bias manifests itself in various ways , including systematic errors and misconceptions ( e . g . , Longer decimals are bigger , multiplication always makes bigger ) ; faster and more accurate responses to tasks that are compatible with natural number knowledge , but oth - erwise slower and less accurate responses ; and unjustified feelings of certainty when incorrect responses are provided to incompatible tasks ( see Vamvakoussi 2015 , for a brief overview of the different aspects of the natural number bias ) . The transition from natural to rational numbers has been acknowledged as one that requires conceptual change ( Ni and Zhou 2005 ; Smith et al . 2005 ; Vamvakoussi and Vosniadou 2010 ; Vosniadou et al . 2008 ) . In the context of educational research , the term conceptual change refers to the process of knowledge restructuring that is necessary when one is exposed to information that is not compat - ible with one’s prior knowledge ( Schneider et al . 2012 ) . The conceptual change perspective on learning has been prominent in science education research . Science education researchers were interested in how concepts change in the process of learning science under instruction ( see the semi - nal paper by Posner et al . 1982 ) , with a view to account for , and address , the phenomenon of students’ systematic misconceptions . In 2004 , an attempt was initiated to take a conceptual change perspective on mathematics learning ( Verschaffel and Vosniadou 2004 ) . A specific approach to conceptual change , namely the framework theory approach ( Vosniadou et al . 2008 ) , originally developed to explain students’ conceptual difficulties in science learning , has since been fruitfully applied in the area of mathematics learning ( see Vamvakoussi et al . 2013 , for an overview of related research ) . A key assumption of this approach is that from early on children organize their interpretations of eve - ryday experiences into few , relatively coherent conceptual structures termed framework theories . Framework theories allow children to generate explanations for various phe - nomena , make predictions , and deal with unfamiliar situ - ations . One such framework theory pertains to the domain of number . Indeed , evidence stemming from cognitive - developmental research indicates that , in the context of lay culture , preschoolers have already formed a principled understanding of numbers as counting numbers , which is further enriched and strengthened by early instruction that focuses on natural numbers ( Gelman 1990 , 2000 ; Ni and Zhou 2005 ; Smith et al . 2005 ) . Thus , before being exposed to rational number instruction , students have constructed rather structured framework theories of number which are based on informal and formal experiences of natural num - ber features and properties , and shape their beliefs and expectations about what numbers are and how they func - tion ( see Vamvakoussi and Vosniadou 2010 , for a detailed 499 Using analogies to facilitate conceptual change in mathematics learning 1 3 account of students’ framework theories of number ) . When non - natural numbers are introduced in the curriculum , practically every background assumption of these theo - ries is no longer valid . In their attempts to make sense of non - natural numbers , students draw heavily on their prior knowledge about natural numbers , which results in system - atic errors precisely in tasks that touch upon the differences between the natural and the rational numbers . Restructuring the initial framework theories of number is a challenging and time - consuming process , because it involves the revision of a system of interrelated ideas about numbers that requires ( among others ) re - evaluation of deeply entrenched assumptions ( e . g . , numbers are discrete ) ; ontological shifts ( e . g . , natural and non - natural numbers are members of the same category ) ; representational changes ( e . g . , from the number sequence , to dense intervals ) ; and re - evaluation of numerous procedures and strategies that do not apply to rational numbers ( e . g . , the value of a decimal number cannot be judged by the number of its digits ) . Thus the problem of conceptual change in the transi - tion from natural to rational numbers presents mathematics educators with a big challenge . The question arises whether principles for instruction stemming from conceptual change perspectives on learning can be useful for instruc - tion aiming at addressing this major source of difficulties for students . Conceptual change perspectives on learning have been initially associated with cognitive conflict as a main instructional strategy . The central component of this strat - egy is to confront students with information that contra - dicts their current ideas . Although sometimes effective , this strategy has been criticized on several grounds ( Limón 2001 ; Merenluoto and Lehtinen 2004 ; Smith et al . 1993 ) . For example , it has been pointed out that what constitutes a conflict from the point of view of the teacher is not nec - essarily perceived as such by the students , because they may neglect or misinterpret the contradictory information ( when , for example , they are not fully aware of their own ideas or when they are overconfident in them ) ; that it is not easy for all students to handle cognitive conflict pro - ductively , because it requires substantial effort that a stu - dent might not be motivated to put into this task ; and that inducing cognitive conflict may create feelings of uncer - tainty , or even frustration , that some students find difficult to handle . It was thus acknowledged that cognitive conflict should be used with caution . Moreover , it was also realized that teaching for conceptual change is a complex enterprise that cannot rely solely on cognitive conflict . Several princi - ples for instruction aiming at conceptual change have been put forward and tested ( e . g . , Vosniadou et al . 2001 ) . This paper focuses on the use of analogies in instruction aiming at conceptual change , in particular on the bridging analogy approach . This approach has been proposed as a strategy that fosters conceptual change by building on students’ pro - ductive ideas instead of emphasizing their misconceptions , and has been implemented in the context of science educa - tion with positive outcomes ( Clement 2008 ) . In the following the theoretical underpinnings for the value of analogical reasoning in conceptual restructuring as well as its relevance for mathematics learning will be discussed , with focus on the development of the number concept . 2 . 1 Analogical reasoning and conceptual change Analogical reasoning relies on the comparison between two systems that can belong to the same , to similar or to differ - ent domains , and are perceived as similar in some respects . The one deemed more familiar to the individual is termed “the source” , while the less familiar one is termed “the target” . Analogical reasoning involves mapping between the source and the target , that is , finding correspondences between the two systems . If a solid match is accomplished , based on structural rather than superficial similarities , then knowledge of the source can be employed productively to draw inferences about the target . Analogical reasoning is acknowledged by psychologists as well as mathematics educators as a process than can trigger the generation of hypotheses about an unfamiliar situation , serve as a source of problem - solving strategies and , more generally , as an aid to discovery and learning . ( e . g . , English 1997 ; Gentner et al . 1997 ) . Cross - domain mapping is considered a “bootstrapping process” that supports learning when what is to be learned transcends what is already known not merely in a quantita - tive , but also in some qualitative way ( Carey 2004 ; Smith et al . 2005 ) ; and , importantly , as a mechanism for con - ceptual restructuring , since in the process of comparing the source and the target , either or both domains may be re - organized to improve the match ( Gentner et al . 1997 ; Gentner and Wolff 2000 ; Vosniadou 1989 ) . Cross - domain mapping , especially between physical quantity and number , is an extremely important mechanism for the development and restructuring of number concepts in the individual ( Resnick and Singer 1993 ; Siegler 2016 ; Smith et al . 2005 ) . For example , Smith et al . ( 2005 ) argue that cross - domain mapping between physical quantity and number can bring children to see numbers as infinitely divisible . Cross - domain mapping has been also been instrumental for the development and restructuring of mathematical knowledge in the context of discovery . Taking a strong position , Núñez and Lakoff ( 2005 ) argue that practically all mathematical ideas rely on cross - domain mappings from 500 X . Vamvakoussi 1 3 one conceptual domain to another which they call concep - tual metaphors . 1 A prominent example of cross - domain mapping in the history of mathematics is the complex interplay between arithmetic and geometry ( Dantzig 2005 ) . The central concept of arithmetic , namely number , and the straight line , started as two radically different objects of study ( numbers were deemed discrete , while the line was deemed the exemplar of continuity ) , and ended up related by the numbers - to - points correspondence . The comparison between number and the line , acting interchangeably as source and target domains has been associated with the development of powerful mathematical ideas and tools , such as analytic geometry and the calculus , and was instru - mental in the development and formalization of the con - cepts of number , infinity , and continuum . In this process , the concept of number as well as of the line underwent rad - ical changes of meaning : The category of number , initially including only the natural numbers , changed to encompass non - natural numbers ; and the straight line was reconceptu - alised as set of points ( Lakoff and Núñez 2000 ; see also ; Vamvakoussi and Vosniadou 2012 ) . Analogies that rely on the comparison between two dif - ferent domains are pervasive in mathematics instruction . A prominent example is the use of concrete or graphic / dia - grammatic representations of abstract mathematical ideas ( English 1997 ) . Consider , for example , that the main exter - nal representations for natural numbers in the early years build on the mapping between physical ( discrete ) quantity and number , via the act of counting . Consider also that the analogy “numbers are points on the line” , a product of the long - term comparison between the domains of arithmetic and geometry , underlies an extensively used representation of numbers in today’s mathematics classrooms , namely the number line . With this last example in mind , it can be noted that anal - ogies used ( explicitly or implicitly ) in mathematics instruc - tion can be of a very abstract nature , rich in very elabo - rate meanings , and thus not readily accessible to students . Indeed , despite the fact that analogical reasoning is a fun - damental aspect of human cognition that is employed spon - taneously even by young children to make sense of unfamil - iar phenomena , it has been amply documented that when people are presented with specific analogies and asked to use them , they fail to a considerable extent ( Duit 1991 ; Dunbar 2001 ) . This phenomenon becomes a problem when it comes to analogies used in instruction . There are several reasons why the use of analogies in instruction does not 1 There is a debate regarding the relation between analogy and meta - phor . It is beyond the scope of this paper to enter this discussion . Fol - lowing Bowdle and Gentner ( 2005 ) , we take ( conceptual ) metaphor to be a species of analogy . always yield the expected results ( Clement 2008 ) : Some - times the analogies used are simply not appropriate . Other times , however , the source is not as familiar to students as expected ; or students may interpret it on the basis of their initial ideas that are not consistent with the intended sci - entific ideas . Often , the relational similarities between the source and the target are not transparent to students . It thus appears that extensive support is required in instruction for students to be able to use the intended analogy productively ( Richland et al . 2007 ) . Clement and colleagues ( e . g . , Brown and Clement 1989 ; Clement 1993 , 2008 ) proposed the bridging analogies teaching strategy that involves the purposeful interpola - tion between students’ initial understanding of a situation and the intended scientific idea of one or more intermediate anchoring situations . An anchoring situation is close to stu - dents’ initial ideas , but is also compatible with the intended scientific idea ; it is thus expected to trigger a favourable intuition , that is , an intuition that can be developed toward the understanding of the target situation . For example , in a situation where a book lies on a table , students typically do not see the table as exerting any force on the book , which is a common misconception about acting - reacting forces . The researchers designed interventions based on an anchor - ing example ( i . e . , a book on a spring ) that was followed by bridging examples ( e . g . , a book on foam rubber ) until they gradually reached the target situation ( i . e . , the book on the table ) . The bridging analogies strategy has been extensively employed in science education research by Clement and colleagues , but also by other research groups ( e . g . , Bryce and Macmillan 2005 ; Savinainen et al . 2005 ; Yilmaz et al . 2006 ) , and has proved fairly successful in bringing students to reconsider and revise their initial ideas about scientific phenomena that were inconsistent with the scientific view . In the following I illustrate how an analogy ( “numbers are points on the line” ) together with a bridging anal - ogy ( “the number line as a rubber line” ) was used in the design of an experimental intervention aiming at fostering students’ understanding of the dense ordering of rational numbers . 2 . 2 Tapping into students’ understanding of the density property of rational numbers Unlike natural numbers , rational numbers are densely ordered . There are different ways to describe what dense order is , all of which are equivalent from a mathematical point of view : ( a ) between any two , non - equal , rational numbers there is always another rational number ( and , thus , there are infinitely many intermediates ) , ( b ) no rational number has a ( unique ) successor in the rational numbers 501 Using analogies to facilitate conceptual change in mathematics learning 1 3 set , ( c ) there is no least positive rational number , and ( d ) rational numbers are infinitely divisible . Historically , the idea of density emerged in a geometri - cal context , as a defining property of continuous quantities , notably of the straight line . It took centuries before it was transferred to the domain of number , and differentiated from continuity ( see Vamvakoussi and Vosniadou 2012 , for a more detailed account ) . Interestingly , the cross - domain mapping between number and the line was , as already men - tioned , instrumental in this respect . In principle , the density of rational numbers is accessi - ble via simple procedures that are taught at the elementary school . For example , one can always find ( some more ) frac - tions between two given fractions ( e . g . , 2 / 5 and 3 / 5 ) by con - verting them to equivalent forms ( e . g . , 4 / 10 and 6 / 10 ) ; one can always find ( some more ) decimals between two deci - mals ( e . g . , 0 . 5 and 0 . 6 ) also by converting them to equiv - alent forms ( e . g . , 0 . 50 and 0 . 60 ) ; and this process can be repeated again and again . However , the density property is notoriously difficult for students from elementary and sec - ondary ( McMullen et al . 2015 ; Merenluoto and Lehtinen 2002 ) , up to tertiary education ( Giannakoulias et al . 2007 ) . A repeating finding is that students typically assign the property of discreteness to rational numbers , which is inter - preted as an intrusion of natural number knowledge . In the following I summarize a series of studies that looked into students’ understandings of density from a conceptual change perspective and provided a detailed picture of stu - dents’ difficulties . In a series of studies ( Vamvakoussi et al . 2003 , 2011 ; Vamvakoussi and Vosniadou 2004 , 2007 , 2010 , 2012 ) we investigated secondary students’ ( 7th to 11th graders ) understanding of the density of rational numbers as well as of the points on a straight line segment . A variety of tasks ( see also Van Dooren et al . 2013 ) was designed to tap into students’ understandings , including open and forced - choice items ; construction of models for numbers , for the number line and for the geometrical line ; comparison between stu - dents’ models and models used in instruction ; and thought experiments ( e . g . , Imagine that you can become as small as a point of the number line . Then you could see the other points up close . Suppose that you are on the point that stands for the number 2 . 3 . Can you define what point is the one closest to you ? Describe in words or by drawing a picture ) . These tasks targeted mainly the “infinitely many intermediates” and the “no successor” aspect of density and were used in qualitative as well as quantitative studies , including intervention studies . As expected , we found clear interference of natural number knowledge in the arithmetical context . Specifi - cally , students responded very frequently that there is a finite number ( often , zero ) of intermediates between two rational numbers . In addition , we found that the kind ( natural / non - natural number ) and the representational form ( fraction / decimal ) of the interval end points had a strong effect on students’ judgments about the num - ber of intermediate numbers . More specifically , students were more prone to accept the infinity of intermediates between two natural numbers than between fractions or decimals ; they might answer that there are infinitely many numbers between two decimals , but a finite num - ber of intermediates between two fractions , or vice versa ; they might answer that there are infinitely many interme - diates , but of the same representational form as the inter - val end points ( i . e . , infinitely many decimals between decimals , and infinitely many fractions between frac - tions ) . These findings suggested that students’ conceptu - alizations of rational numbers were far from the view of the rational numbers set as a unified system of numbers that are invariant under different symbolic representa - tional forms . This interpretation was further corroborated by students’ own models as well as verbal descriptions of the rational numbers set . On the other hand , we found that students performed better in a geometrical context ( Vamvakoussi and Vosnia - dou 2012 ) . Indeed , students were more likely to answer that there are infinitely many points between two points of a straight line , than to answer that there are infinitely many numbers between two numbers . This finding should not be taken to suggest that students had a firm understanding of the infinity of points of a line segment . For instance , we also found that students were susceptible to variations of the segment length ( “more points on a longer segment” ) . In addition , the great majority of students described the segment as a “necklace of beads” ( Sbaragli 2006 ) or as a continuous albeit two dimensional object that gets larger in width when it gets magnified . These findings are consist - ent with the assumption that students do not differentiate between the idealized geometrical objects and their physi - cal representations , a phenomenon that has been noted in the literature ( e . g . , Fischbein 1987 ) . For some students it is also possible that when referring to the infinity of points on a line segment , they actually refer to a very large number of very small entities , like grains of a very fine powder . What is interesting is that whatever understanding stu - dents had of the infinity of points in a line segment did not transfer to numbers , even when the numbers were pre - sented on the number line ( Vamvakoussi and Vosniadou 2007 , 2012 ) . In fact , sometimes the presence of the number line had a negative effect on students’ responses , causing them to move from “infinitely many intermediates” in the numerical context to “a finite number of intermediates” in the presence of the number line . Consider , however , that students are from early on exposed in instruction to expe - riences with the “number track” ( i . e . , a sequence of num - bers typically placed in a series of adjacent squares ) and the 502 X . Vamvakoussi 1 3 ruler ( Doritou and Gray 2009 ; English 1997 ) , which may explain this finding . Finally , we found that from the students’ point of view , the infinity of intermediates was not equivalent to the “no successor” principle , neither in arithmetical nor in geo - metrical context : Students who were on the “infinity of intermediates” side could nevertheless believe that there is a successor to a given number or point . One could argue that this finding again reflects students’ interpretation of the expression “infinitely many” as “a very large amount” . However , we also had evidence coming from in - depth interviews showing that students who actually were able to describe a mechanism producing infinitely many numbers in an interval , and who even stated that the successor of a given number cannot be pinned down precisely because of the infinity of numbers , still insisted that there is a succes - sor ( Vamvakoussi 2010 ) . This finding becomes less sur - prising , if one considers how students reach the conclusion that there are infinitely many numbers in a given interval : Students typically rely on recursive processes , very similar to the ones described above , that consist of discrete steps , each step producing a finite number of intermediates . In our studies we had the opportunity to witness some students reach this conclusion on the spot , presumably because they had never been asked this question before . When asked , for instance , about the intermediates of 0 . 2 and 0 . 3 , some stu - dents typically started by presenting 0 . 21 , 0 . 22 , 0 . 23 , and so on , as examples . Then they thought of the possibility of adding another decimal digit , and came up with 0 . 211 , 0 . 212 and so on . At some point , they realized that they can always add another decimal digit . They concluded that there are infinitely many intermediates , in the sense that there are always more to be found , by adding more deci - mal digits . This realization , however , does not necessarily imply the representation of these numbers as a dense array . 2 . 3 Using bridging analogies and other analogies to foster students’ understanding of density Based on our insights about students’ prior understand - ings of density , we looked for the kind of intervention that could bring within the grasp of students this notion , par - ticularly its “no successor” aspect that appeared to be the most challenging one . We hypothesized that an interven - tion building on the cross - domain mapping between num - ber and the line , via the “numbers are points on the line” analogy , could be effective in this respect . The geometrical line was selected as source , since it appeared that the idea of density was more accessible to students in this context . In addition , it would allow us to circumvent the problem of interpretation of rational number notation , which was an additional challenge for our participants . In fact , the anal - ogy “numbers are points on the line” has the potential to support students’ understanding of rational numbers as individual entities , invariant under different forms of rep - resentation and , eventually , the rational numbers as a uni - fied system of numbers ( Kilpatrick et al . 2001 ) . However , it should be evident from the discussion above that there was a considerable gap between students’ interpretations of the geometrical line , and the sophisticated idea of the line as a dense array of points that are not arranged such that one is immediately next to the other . Inspired by the bridging analogies approach of Clement and colleagues , we devised the “rubber line” ( i . e . , an imaginary elastic line that never breaks , no matter how much it is stretched ) as a bridging device . We reasoned that “the rubber line” could be effective because it evokes students’ experiences with a real world object , that is , the rubber band ; it is consistent with students’ experiences with physical representations of the number line ; it is associated , via the imaginary property of being unbreakable , with a recursive process , which is an easier way of accessing the notion of infinity for students ; and , finally , this process produces a sequence of segments , rather than a sequence of points that can be deemed dis - crete . We hypothesized that the “rubber line” has the poten - tial to help students grasp the idea that points can never be found such that one lies next to the other . This hypothesis was tested in a short , text - based inter - vention ( Vamvakoussi and Vosniadou 2012 ) . We produced a text that provided explicit information about the infinity of numbers in a specific interval ; made explicit reference to the numbers - to - points correspondence ; and employed the analogy of the rubber line to convey the idea that points ( and numbers ) can never be found one immediately next the other . The excerpt regarding the bridging analogy reads as follows : How is it possible for all these numbers to be placed in the interval between 0 and 1 on the number line ? Are there enough points available ? The mathematical number line is a strange object . You can imagine it as a rubber band that never breaks , no matter how much you stretch it . Place numbers between 0 and 1 , until it looks like you have used all the available points . If you stretch the rubber band , then you will find out that between the points that looked as if there were the one next to the other , there are more available points , corresponding to more numbers . This procedure can be repeated infi - nitely many times—don’t forget that your imaginary rubber band never breaks ! So , there are infinitely many points between the points corresponding to 0 and 1—therefore , there are infinitely many numbers between 0 and 1 . ( p . 284 ) . We tested experimentally the value of the “rubber line” comparing it to two other texts that presented the same 503 Using analogies to facilitate conceptual change in mathematics learning 1 3 information as the experimental text , except for the rub - ber line bridging analogy that was replaced by examples of intermediate numbers in one of the texts , and by figures illustrating the examples in the other . Six classes of 8th and 11th graders ( 140 students in total ) received a pre - test with density tasks in arithmetical and geometrical context , tar - geting the “infinitely many intermediates” aspect of den - sity ; then each class received one of the texts ( i . e . , one class per grade received the experimental text ) ; and finally , they received a post - test containing all the tasks of the pre - test , and 5 additional tasks that examined whether students were able to deal with the “no successor” aspect of density ( see Fig . 1 ) . Our results showed that all groups profited from the explicit information about the infinity of numbers presented in all three texts , improving their performance in the “infi - nitely many intermediates” items . However , the experimen - tal group outperformed the other groups in the “no suc - cessor” items of the post - test . In addition , the students of the experimental group were more consistent in providing correct answers across contexts ( i . e . , for numbers , the line , and the number line ) ; and more consistent in providing explanations for their answers . Their explanations indicated that they had employed effectively the ideas underlying the rubber line bridging analogy . Consider , for example , the following response ( in written text ) of a student reacting to the last task presented in Fig . 1 , keeping in mind that , based on her responses in the pre - test , this student was clearly on the discreteness side before the intervention . Between 2 . 001 and 2 . 002 there are infinitely many points . Actually , if we think of the number line , that we can stretch ( mentally ) as much as we like , then we understand that it is not possible to make a picture showing infinitely many tiny spots between 2 . 001 and 2 . 002 . ( Vamvakoussi and Vosniadou 2012 , p . 279 ) To sum up , we designed this intervention on the basis of an analogy between two different domains , building the intended mathematical idea in the source that we took to be more accessible to students , and using a bridging analogy to decrease the gap between students’ initial ideas of the source and the intended ones . It should be stressed that this intervention relied heavily on the insights into students’ thinking , gained through our previous studies . 3 Discussion In this paper I focused on a problem that is relevant to psy - chology as well as to mathematics education , namely the Fig . 1 Tasks targeting the “no successor” aspect of density 504 X . Vamvakoussi 1 3 problem of natural number interference in rational number learning . This problem can be placed in the more general frame of the role of prior knowledge in further learning . I presented the rationale of an experimental intervention that was based on a principle for instruction stemming from conceptual change perspectives on learning , namely the use of analogies and the bridging analogies strategy to foster students’ understanding of ideas that are qualitatively dif - ferent from their current understandings ( Clement 2008 ; Vosniadou et al . 2008 ) . The study has certain merits : It is theoretically grounded , and built upon careful analysis of the targeted mathematical concept as well as on research - based evidence of students’ understandings of density ; it involves the development and assessment of a specific instructional tool and it shows that this tool can have a positive impact on students’ under - standing of a highly counter - intuitive concept , even with a minimal intervention . This said , how relevant is this study from a mathematics education perspective ? It could be argued that the study is narrow in its scope and deals with only a very small fraction of the challenges faced by educators in rational number teaching . Moreover , the targeted concept does not have a central place in the mathematics curriculum – in fact , density is not even explic - itly addressed in some curricula , such as the Greek and the Flemish ones ( Van Dooren et al . 2013 ) . In addition , the intervention was restricted to imposing text - based infor - mation on students and did not allow for teacher - student or student – student interaction in the classroom ; clearly , this is not an optimal learning environment from the point of view of instruction . One could also ask , after asserting that con - ceptual change is a difficult and slow process , is it possible to expect that such a short - term intervention could have a substantial impact on students’ conceptualization of num - bers , or of the line ? The above concerns are not hypothetical ones . In fact , they were explicitly expressed by the reviewers of the man - uscript reporting this particular study , who voiced ( some of ) the tensions between research that is more cognitively - oriented and research that is more educationally - oriented . Moreover , all concerns are justifiable from the point of view of an educator who seeks to maximize the opportu - nity for students to learn : Why should one spend valuable teaching time on a highly abstract and counter - intuitive concept , if it’s not among the curricular goals ? And why should one restrict oneself to using a text ? Had this inter - vention allowed for more interaction in the classroom , for more feedback by the teacher , for the use of dynamic rep - resentations via educational software , and so on , it would have arguably been more effective . It should be acknowledged that such a short - term , exper - imental intervention cannot be expected to have substantial or sustainable learning outcomes for students . What it can do , however , is to establish that the underlying principles can be of value to education , provided that they are used systematically and on a long - term basis . In the following I will attempt to draw some recommendations , which are compatible with conceptual change perspectives on learn - ing , and could arguably be appreciated by mathematics educators as well . These recommendations are by no means exhaustive , but are related to the series of studies presented above and to the issues discussed . Keep in mind that even mathematical ideas deemed “simple” are in fact highly complex and abstract Consider , for example , that fractions and decimals are introduced as “numbers” in instruction in a matter - of - fact way , although they differ in many important respects from what students recognize as “numbers” – for instance , they do not answer a “how many ? ” question . Substantial effort is required for students to acknowledge non - natural numbers as full - fledged numbers , members of the same family as the natu - ral numbers . This requires focusing on the deep similarities between natural and non - natural numbers , e . g . , highlight - ing similarities between counting and measuring , pointing to the fact that natural and non - natural numbers have mag - nitudes , and that they are all placed on the ( same ) number line ( see also Siegler 2016 ) . Take students’ prior knowledge into account This prin - ciple is so widely acknowledged that it may seem trivial to repeat it here . However , there are different ways to take prior knowledge in account in instruction , and it is worth summarizing them . First , the adverse effects of prior knowledge should be considered . According to Moss ( 2005 ) , an important problem in rational number instruction is that not enough attention is paid to students’ struggle to assign meaning to rational numbers . More opportunities for students to exter - nalize and negotiate their ideas about numbers need to be provided in the classroom , so that they become aware of them and that are able to evaluate and eventually revise them ( Vosniadou et al . 2001 ) . It could be noted here that the use of not - typical tasks , such as the tasks about density used in our studies , can have a value in this respect . Second , the positive role of prior knowledge should be considered . In fact , conceptual change perspectives on learning have been criticized on the grounds that they over - emphasize the adverse effects of prior knowledge , neglect - ing students’ productive ideas that can serve as a basis for further learning ( Smith et al . 1993 ) . The bridging strategy discussed in this article is but one example of constructive use of students’ ideas in instruction , aiming at inducing conceptual change . Another elaborate example in the area of fraction learning can be found in the work of Steffe and Olive ( 2010 ) . Third , when capitalizing on students’ prior knowledge , the long - term consequences should also be taken into 505 Using analogies to facilitate conceptual change in mathematics learning 1 3 consideration . Indeed , not all aspects of prior knowledge are productive in the long run ( Resnick 2006 ) . A prominent example is the over - emphasis on the part - whole aspect of fraction , represented with the area model , which allows for students to employ their natural number knowledge but cre - ates many difficulties in the long run ( Moss 2005 ) . Pay attention to the analogies used in the classroom The use of analogies is supposed to bring within the grasp of students the essentially abstract mathematical ideas . How - ever , great caution is necessary in the selection of analo - gies , since it is possible they may stand in the way of fur - ther learning . Consider , for example , that students’ early encounters with the “number track” might convey the idea that numbers are discrete ( English 1997 ) . Anticipating lat - ter expansions of the meaning of the term number , one could consider starting with continuous number lines ( that do not start at zero ) . Furthermore , one should be aware that analogies are not necessarily transparent to students . Substantial support is required for students to perceive the intended relational similarities and to use them productively ( Richland et al . 2007 ) . Using bridging analogies ( Clement 2008 ) is one way to support students that has been validated by science edu - cation research . As indicated by our study , this approach could be fruitfully applied also to mathematics learning . Invest in the cross - domain mapping between numerical and geometrical objects Cross - domain mapping between physical quantity and number is a fundamental process in the development of number concepts ( Smith et al . 2005 ; Moss 2005 ) . Cross - domain mapping between numbers and the line goes beyond comparing concrete and abstract enti - ties , towards a comparison between abstract entities that has been instrumental in the historical development of the number concept . Purposeful , long - term investment in this mapping in instruction might foster students’ conceptual - ization of numbers as individual entities , invariant under different symbolic representations ; and non - natural num - bers as members of the same category as natural numbers ( see also Kilpatrick et al . 2001 ) . For these recommendations to be truly useful for educa - tors , further research is necessary focusing on the develop - ment , assessment , and implementation of curricular materi - als that build on these ideas . This kind of research lies in the intersection of cognitive - developmental psychology and education and could be an example of a bridge between the two fields . References Alcock , L . , Ansari , B . , Batchelor , S . , Bissona , M . J . , De Smedt , B . , Gilmore C . , . . . , & Webe , K ( 2016 ) . Challenges in mathematical cognition : a collaboratively - derived research agenda . Journal of Numerical Cognition , 2 , 20 – 41 . doi : 10 . 5964 / jnc . v2i1 . 10 . Anderson , J . R . , Reder , L . M . , & Simon , H . A . ( 2000 ) . Applications and misapplications of cognitive psychology to mathemat - ics education . Texas Educational Review . Retrieved on 2016 August 15 from http : / / act - r . psy . cmu . edu / ? post _ type = publicati ons & p = 13741 . Berch , D . B . ( 2016 ) . Disciplinary differences between cognitive psychology and mathematics education : A developmental dis - connection syndrome . Journal of Numerical Cognition , 2 ( 1 ) , 42 – 47 . doi : 10 . 5964 / jnc . v2i1 . 23 . Bowdle , B . F . , & Gentner , D . ( 2005 ) . The career of met - aphor . Psychological Review , 112 ( 1 ) , 193 – 216 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 112 . 1 . 193 . Bransford , J . D . , Brown , A . L . , & Cocking , R . R . ( 2000 ) . How peo - ple learn : Brain , mind , experience , and school . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Brousseau , G . ( 2002 ) . Theory of didactical situations in mathemat - ics ( N . Balacheff , M . Cooper , R . Sutherland , & V . Warfield , Eds . and Trans . ) . New York : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Brown , D . E . , & Clement , J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming misconceptions via analogical reasoning : Abstract transfer versus explana - tory model construction . Instructional Science , 18 , 237 – 261 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00118013 . Bryce , T . , & Macmillan , K . ( 2005 ) . Encouraging conceptual change : the use of bridging analogies in the teaching of action – reaction forces and the ‘at rest’condition in physics . International Journal of Science Education , 27 , 737 – 763 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 09500690500038132 . Carey , S . ( 2004 ) . Bootstrapping and the origin of concepts . Daeda - lus , 133 , 59 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1162 / 001152604772746701 . Clement , J . ( 1993 ) . Using bridging analogies and anchoring intui - tions to deal with students’preconceptions in physics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 , 1241 – 1257 . Clement , J . ( 2008 ) . The role of explanatory models in teaching for conceptual change . In S . Vosniadou ( Ed . ) , International hand - book of research on conceptual change ( 1st ed . , pp . 417 – 452 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Dantzig , T . ( 2005 ) . Number : The language of science ( 4th edn . ) . New York : Pi Press . De Smedt , B . , & Verschaffel , L . ( 2010 ) . Travelling down the road : From cognitive neuroscience to mathematics education …and back . ZDM—The International Journal on Mathematics Edu - cation , 42 , 649 – 654 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11858 - 010 - 0282 - 5 . Donovan , M . S . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 2005 ) . How students learn : History , mathematics , and science in the classroom . Washing - ton , DC : The National Academies Press . Doritou , M . , & Gray , E . ( 2009 ) . Teachers’ subject knowledge : the number line representation . Paper presented at 6th Conference of the European society for Research in Mathematics Educa - tion ( CERME 6 ) , Lyon , France . Duit , R . ( 1991 ) . On the role of analogies and metaphors in learn - ing science . Science Education , 75 , 649 – 672 . doi : 10 . 1002 / sce . 3730750606 . Dunbar , K . ( 2001 ) . The analogical paradox : Why analogy is so easy in naturalistic settings yet so difficult in the psychologi - cal laboratory . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak & B . N . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The analogical mind : Perspectives from cognitive sci - ence ( pp . 313 – 3340 ) . Cambridge : The MIT Press . English , L . D . ( 1997 ) . Analogies , metaphors , and images : Vehicles for mathematical reasoning . In L . D . English ( Ed . ) , Mathemat - ical reasoning : Analogies , metaphors , and images ( pp . 3 – 18 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Fischbein , E . ( 1987 ) . Intuition in science and mathematics . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers . 506 X . Vamvakoussi 1 3 Gelman , R . ( 1990 ) . First principles organize attention to and learn - ing about relevant data : Number and animate - inanimate distinc - tion as examples . Cognitive Science , 14 , 79 – 106 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog1401 _ 5 . Gelman , R . ( 2000 ) . The epigenesis of mathematical thinking . Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , 21 , 27 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0193 - 3973 ( 99 ) 00048 - 9 . Gentner , D . , Brem , S . , Ferguson , R . W . , Markman , A . B . , Levidow , B . B . , Wolff , P . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1997 ) . Analogical reason - ing and conceptual change : A case study of Johannes Kepler . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 6 ( 1 ) , 3 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15327809jls0601 _ 2 . Gentner , D . , & Wolff , P . ( 2000 ) . Metaphor and knowledge change . In E . Dietrich & A . Markman ( Eds . ) , Conceptual change in humans and machines ( pp . 295 – 342 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Giannakoulias , E . , Souyoul , A . , & Zachariades , T . ( 2007 ) . Students’ thinking about fundamental real numbers properties . In D . Pitta - Pantazi & G . Philippou ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the Fifth Congress of the European Society for Research in Mathematics Education ( pp . 416 – 425 ) . Cyprus : ERME , Department of Education , Uni - versity of Cyprus . Hartnett , P . , & Gelman , R . ( 1998 ) . Early understandings of num - bers : Paths or barriers to the construction of new understand - ings ? Learning and Instruction , 8 , 341 – 374 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0959 - 4752 ( 97 ) 00026 - 1 . Jacob , N . J . , Vallentin , D . , & Nieder , A . ( 2012 ) . Relating magnitudes : The brain’s code for proportions . Trends in Cognitive Science , 16 , 157 – 166 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2012 . 02 . 002 . Kilpatrick , J . ( 2014 ) . History of research in mathematics education . In S . Lehrman ( Ed . ) , Encyclopedia of mathematics education ( pp . 267 – 271 ) . London : Springer . Kilpatrick , J . , Swafford , J . , & Findell , B . ( 2001 ) . Adding + it up . Helping children learn mathematics . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Lakoff , G . , & Núñez , R . ( 2000 ) . Where mathematics comes from : How the embodied mind brings mathematics into being . New York : Basic Books . Limón , M . ( 2001 ) . On the cognitive conflict as an instructional strat - egy for conceptual change : A critical appraisal . Learning and Instruction , 11 , 357 – 380 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0959 - 4752 ( 00 ) 00037 - 2 . McMullen , J . , Laakkonen , E . , Hannula - Sormunen , M . , & Lehtinen , E . ( 2015 ) . Modeling the developmental trajectories of rational number concept ( s ) . Learning and Instruction , 37 , 14 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2013 . 12 . 004 . Merenluoto , K . , & Lehtinen , E . ( 2002 ) . Conceptual change in math - ematics : Understanding the real numbers . In M . Limon & L . Mason ( Eds . ) , Reconsidering conceptual change : Issues in the - ory and practice ( pp . 233 – 258 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Merenluoto , K . , & Lehtinen , E . ( 2004 ) . Number concept and con - ceptual change : Towards a systemic model of the processes of change . Learning and Instruction , 14 , 519 – 534 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2004 . 06 . 016 . Moss , J . ( 2005 ) . Pipes , tubes , and beakers : New approaches to teach - ing the rational number system . In M . S . Donovan & J . D . Brans - ford ( Eds . ) , How students learn : Mathematics in the classroom ( pp . 121 – 162 ) . Washington , DC : National Academic Press . Ni , Y . , & Zhou , Y . - D . ( 2005 ) . Teaching and learning fraction and rational numbers : The origins and implications of whole num - ber bias . Educational Psychologist , 40 ( 1 ) , 27 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15326985ep4001 _ 3 . Núñez , R . , & Lakoff , G . ( 2005 ) . The cognitive foundations of math - ematics : The role of conceptual metaphor . In J . I . D . Campbell ( Ed . ) , Handbook of mathematical cognition ( pp . 109 – 124 ) . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Posner , G . J . , Strike , K . A . , Hewson , P . W . , & Gertzog , W . A . ( 1982 ) . Accommodation of a scientific conception : Towards a theory of conceptual change . Science Education , 66 , 211 – 227 . doi : 10 . 1002 / sce . 3730660207 . Resnick , L . , & Singer , J . ( 1993 ) . Protoquantitative origins of ratio reasoning . In T . Carpenter , E . Fennema & T . Romberg ( Eds . ) , Rational numbers : An integration of research ( pp . 107 – 130 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Resnick , L . B . ( 2006 ) . The dilemma of mathematical intuition in learning . In J . Novotná , H . Moraová , M . Krátká & N . Stehliková ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 30th Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education ( Vol . 1 , pp . 173 – 175 ) . Prague : PME . Richland , L . E . , Zur , O . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2007 ) . Cognitive supports for analogies in the mathematics classroom . Science , 316 , 1128 – 1129 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1142103 . Savinainen , A . , Scott , P . , & Viiri , J . ( 2005 ) . Using a bridging repre - sentation and social interactions to foster conceptual change : Designing and evaluating an instructional sequence for New - ton’s third law . Science Education , 89 ( 2 ) , 175 – 195 . doi : 10 . 1002 / sce . 20037 . Sbaragli , S . ( 2006 ) . Primary school teachers’ beliefs and change of beliefs on mathematical infinity . Mediterranean Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 5 ( 2 ) , 49 – 76 . Schneider , M . , Vamvakoussi , X . , & Van Dooren , W . ( 2012 ) . Concep - tual change . In N . M . Seel ( Ed . ) , Encyclopedia of the sciences of learning ( pp . 735 – 738 ) . New York : Springer . Schoenfeld , A . H . ( Ed . ) . ( 1987 ) . Cognitive science and mathematics education . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Siegler , R . S . ( 2016 ) . Magnitude knowledge : The common core of numerical development . Developmental Science , 19 , 341 – 361 . doi : 10 . 1111 / desc . 12395 . Smith , C . L . , Solomon , G . E . A . , & Carey , S . ( 2005 ) . Never getting to zero : Elementary school students’ understanding of the infi - nite divisibility of number and matter . Cognitive Psychology , 51 , 101 – 140 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogpsych . 2005 . 03 . 001 . Smith , J . P . , diSessa , A . A . , & Roschelle , J . ( 1993 ) . Misconceptions reconceived : A constructivist analysis of knowledge in tran - sition . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 3 ( 2 ) , 115 – 163 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15327809jls0302 _ 1 . Steffe , L . P . , & Olive , J . ( 2010 ) . Children’s fractional knowledge . New York , NY : Springer . Vamvakoussi , X . ( 2010 ) . The ‘numbers are points οn the line’ anal - ogy : Does it have an instructional value ? In L . Verschaffel , E . De Corte , T . de Jong & J . Elen ( Eds . ) , Use of external representa - tions in reasoning and problem solving : Analysis and improve - ment . New Perspectives on Learning and Instruction Series ( pp . 209 – 224 ) . New York , NY : Routlege . Vamvakoussi , X . ( 2015 ) . The development of rational number knowl - edge : Old topic , new insights . Learning and Instruction , 37 , 50 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2015 . 01 . 002 . Vamvakoussi , X . , Christou , K . P . , & Van Dooren , W . ( 2011 ) . What fills the gap between the discrete and the dense ? Greek and Flemish students’ understanding of density . Learning & Instruc - tion , 21 , 676 – 685 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2011 . 03 . 005 . Vamvakoussi , X . , Kargiotakis , G . , Kollias , Mamalougos , N . G . , & Vosniadou , S . ( 2003 ) . Collaborative modelling of rational num - bers . In B . Wasson , S . Ludvigsen & U . Hoppe ( Eds . ) , Designing for change in networked learning environments—Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Support for Collabo - rative Learning ( pp . 103 – 107 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Vamvakoussi , X . , Van Dooren , W . , & Verschaffel , L . ( 2012 ) . Natu - rally biased ? In search for reaction time evidence for a natural number bias in adults . The Journal of Mathematical Behavior , 31 , 344 – 355 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmathb . 2012 . 02 . 001 . 507 Using analogies to facilitate conceptual change in mathematics learning 1 3 Vamvakoussi , X . , & Vosniadou , S . ( 2004 ) . Understanding the structure of the set of rational numbers : A conceptual change approach . Learning and Instruction , 14 , 453 – 467 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2004 . 06 . 013 . Vamvakoussi , X . , & Vosniadou , S . ( 2007 ) . How many numbers in an interval ? Presuppositions , synthetic models and the effect of the number line . Ιn S . Vosniadou . In A . Baltas & X . Vamvakoussi ( Eds . ) , Reframing the conceptual change approach in learning and instruction ( pp . 267 – 283 ) . Oxford : Elsevier . Vamvakoussi , X . , & Vosniadou , S . ( 2010 ) . How many deci - mals are there between two fractions ? Aspects of second - ary school students’ understanding of rational numbers and their notation . Cognition and Instruction , 28 ( 2 ) , 181 – 209 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 07370001003676603 . Vamvakoussi , X . , & Vosniadou , S . ( 2012 ) . Bridging the gap between the dense and the discrete : the number line and the “rubber line” bridging analogy . Mathematical Thinking and Learning , 14 , 265 – 284 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10986065 . 2012 . 717378 . Vamvakoussi , X . , Vosniadou , S . , & Van Dooren , W . ( 2013 ) . The framework theory approach applied to mathematics learning . In S . Vosniadou ( Ed . ) , International handbook of research on conceptual change ( 2nd Ed . ) ( pp . 305 – 321 ) . New York , NY : Routledge . Van Dooren , W . , Vamvakoussi , X . , & Verschaffel , L . ( 2013 ) . Mind the gap – Task design principles to achieve conceptual change in rational number understanding . In C . Margolinas ( Ed . ) , Task design in mathematics education : Proceedings of ICMI Study 22 ( pp . 519 – 527 ) . Oxford : International Commission on Mathemat - ical Instruction . Verschaffel , L . , & Vosniadou , S . ( Guest Eds . ) . ( 2004 ) . The conceptual change approach to mathematics learning and teaching [ Special Issue ] . Learning and Instruction , 14 ( 5 ) . Vosniadou , S . ( 1989 ) . Analogical reasoning as a mechanism in knowl - edge acquisition : A developmental perspective . In S . Vosnia - dou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 413 – 436 ) . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Vosniadou , S . , Ioannides , C . , Dimitrakopoulou , A . , & Papademetriou , E . ( 2001 ) . Designing learning environments to promote concep - tual change in science . Learning and Instruction , 11 , 381 – 419 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0959 - 4752 ( 00 ) 00038 - 4 . Vosniadou , S . , Vamvakoussi , X . , & Skopeliti , I . ( 2008 ) . Τhe frame - work theory approach to conceptual change . In S . Vosniadou ( Ed . ) , International handbook of research on conceptual change ( 1st ed . , pp . 3 – 34 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Yilmaz , S . , Eryilmaz , A . , & Geban , O . ( 2006 ) . Assessing the impact of bridging analogies in mechanics . School Science and Math - ematics , 106 ( 6 ) , 220 – 230 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1949 - 8594 . 2006 . tb17911 . x .