Traction ﬁelds , moments , and strain energy that cells exert on their surroundings JAMES P . BUTLER , 1 IVA MARIJA TOLIC´ - NØRRELYKKE , 1 , 2 BEN FABRY , 1 AND JEFFREY J . FREDBERG 1 1 Harvard School of Public Health , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 ; and 2 Rugjer Bosˇkovic´ Institute , 10001 Zagreb , Croatia Received 15 June 2001 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 24 October 2001 Butler , James P . , Iva Marija Tolic´ - Nørrelykke , Ben Fabry , and Jeffrey J . Fredberg . Traction ﬁelds , moments , and strain energy that cells exert on their surroundings . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 : C595 – C605 , 2002 . First published October 31 , 2001 ; 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00270 . 2001 . —Adherent cells exert tractions on their surroundings . These tractions can be measured by observing the displacements of beads embedded on a ﬂexible gel substrate on which the cells are cultured . This paper presents an exact solution to the prob - lem of computing the traction ﬁeld from the observed dis - placement ﬁeld . The solution rests on recasting the relation - ship between displacements and tractions into Fourier space , where the recovery of the traction ﬁeld is especially simple . We present two subcases of the solution , depending on whether or not tractions outside the observed cell boundaries are set to be zero . The implementation is computationally efﬁcient . We also give the solution for the traction ﬁeld in a representative human airway smooth muscle cell contracted by treatment with histamine . Finally , we give explicit formu - las for reducing the traction and displacement ﬁelds to con - traction moments , the orientation of the principal axes of traction , and the strain energy imparted by the cell to the substrate . displacement ﬁelds ; ﬂuorescent beads CELLS EXERT TRACTIONS on their surroundings in the course of a variety of cell functions including contrac - tion , spreading , crawling , and invasion . These func - tions are associated with complex mechanical interac - tions between the substrate , adhesion molecules , cytoskeletal elements , and molecular motors . Dembo and Wang ( 3 ) recently have shown that the traction ﬁeld that a cell exerts on its surroundings can be mapped from knowledge of the displacement ﬁeld in a ﬂexible substrate on which cells are adherent . Mea - surement of the displacement ﬁeld is accomplished by tracking small beads , typically 0 . 2 (cid:1) m in diameter , embedded near the surface of the substrate gel . Com - puting the tractions from the measured displacement ﬁeld is difﬁcult and computationally intensive , how - ever , so much so that Pelham and Wang ( 5 ) , for exam - ple , suggested using the raw displacements themselves as a qualitative map of the local tractions . More re - cently , Balaban et al . ( 1 ) implemented a simpliﬁed version of the Dembo and Wang ( hereafter denoted DW ) approach , which is restricted to the case of iso - lated point sources of traction . In this article , we describe the foundations of Fourier transform traction cytometry ( FTTC ) , a new and com - putationally efﬁcient method for computing the trac - tion ﬁeld given the displacement ﬁeld . FTTC divides into two subcases ( unconstrained and constrained ) , described below , and in several respects is fundamen - tally different from the DW method . The ﬁrst key difference is that the DW method requires the cell boundary to be drawn by hand and constrains the tractions exterior to the boundary to be zero while still retaining approximate matching of the exterior dis - placements . By contrast , unconstrained FTTC exactly matches all the displacement data , independent of the perceived cell boundary ; constrained FTTC forces the tractions exterior to the cell boundary ( drawn by hand ) to be zero , as in the DW method , but ignores the exterior displacement data . The second key difference is that the DW approach utilizes Tikhonov regulariza - tion ( 8 , 9 ) with a particular choice and intensity of smoothing functional ( 6 , 10 ) . By contrast , FTTC uti - lizes no smoothing and is exact in the sense that it yields a traction map for which the induced displace - ments exactly match the given displacement ﬁeld . The DISCUSSION elaborates these issues . We present the explicit formulation and solution to the traction recovery problem and introduce the con - cept of contraction moments and strain energy , which are particularly robust measures that characterize the cell - substrate interaction . Finally , we include one ex - ample of the traction ﬁeld associated with a human airway smooth muscle cell and an illustration of the displacement and traction ﬁelds associated with a par - ticularly simple simulation . In two companion studies ( 7 , 11 ) , we have utilized FTTC to address the biologi - cally important questions of the relationship between cell prestress and cell rigidity , and the extent to which microtubules play a role in this connection . Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : J . P . But - ler , Physiology Program , Harvard School of Public Health , 665 Hun - tington Ave . , Boston , MA 02115 ( E - mail : jbutler @ hsph . harvard . edu ) . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . The article must therefore be hereby marked ‘‘ advertisement ’’ in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 : C595 – C605 , 2002 . First published October 31 , 2001 ; 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00270 . 2001 . 0363 - 6143 / 02 $ 5 . 00 Copyright © 2002 the American Physiological Society http : / / www . ajpcell . org C595 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m THEORY The Boussinesq Solution The traction ﬁeld is deﬁned as the stress , i . e . , local force per unit area , imposed on the gel surface by an adherent cell . The traction ﬁeld , in turn , determines the displacement ﬁeld of the gel surface . If the gel can be approximated as a semi - inﬁnite solid ( see Limits of applicability ) , the displacements can be computed from the distribution of surface tractions as follows . First , one ﬁnds the displacement ﬁeld , or Green’s function , associated with a point traction on the surface . This is a classic problem , the solution to which was found by Boussinesq ( see Ref . 4 ) . Second , integration of this function over the given traction ﬁeld then yields the corresponding displacement ﬁeld ; this is the so - called forward problem . The problem we address in this arti - cle is the inverse problem , namely , inferring the trac - tion ﬁeld from measured displacements . The FTTC method is based on Fourier analysis and arises from the observation that the displacement at any point r (cid:1) on the surface due to a point traction source at another point r (cid:1) (cid:2) is ( apart from the direction of the displacement and the direction of the traction ) a func - tion only of the difference (cid:1) r (cid:1) (cid:3) r (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:1) . We denote the displacement vector at r (cid:1) (cid:2) as u (cid:1) ( r (cid:1) ) and the traction vector at r (cid:1) (cid:2) as T (cid:1) ( r (cid:1) (cid:2) ) . We denote the Green’s function , or kernel , mapping traction to displacement by the tensor K (cid:4) K ( (cid:1) r (cid:1) (cid:3) r (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:1) ) . The displacements are then given by the convolution u (cid:1) (cid:4) K V T (cid:1) . In this representation , u (cid:1) ( r (cid:1) ) and T (cid:1) ( r (cid:1) (cid:2) ) are 2 - vectors with elements labeled x and y ( we ignore displacements in the z direction , and the trac - tion in the z direction , or normal stress , is taken to be 0 ) , the kernel K is a 2 (cid:5) 2 matrix , and V denotes integration over r (cid:1) (cid:2) . The major difﬁculty in the inver - sion of this equation is that K is not diagonal in r (cid:1) and r (cid:1) (cid:2) ( if it were , then the solution would only involve inverting a 2 (cid:5) 2 matrix ) . The fact that K is not diagonal in real space ( i . e . , tractions at one point are coupled to displacements at different points ) is the origin of why its inversion in real space necessarily requires the construction and inversion of very large matrices ( as in the DW approach ) . In Fourier space , these difﬁculties do not arise . The Boussinesq solution is diagonal in Fourier space . The key to the FTTC method is the exploitation of the Faltung or convolution theorem , which states that the Fourier transform of a convolution is the simple prod - uct of the Fourier transforms of the functions con - volved . The forward problem then becomes u (cid:1) ˜ ( k (cid:1) ) (cid:4) K˜ ( k (cid:1) ) T (cid:1) ˜ ( k (cid:1) ) , where the tilde overbar denotes the ( two dimensional ) Fourier transform with wave vector k (cid:1) . In this form it is clear that K˜ is diagonal in that there is no coupling between different wave vectors k (cid:1) . Of course , K˜ remains a nondiagonal 2 (cid:5) 2 matrix insofar as tractions in the x or y direction separately induce displacements in both the x and y directions , but this presents no difﬁculty because K˜ remains strictly diag - onal in k (cid:1) space . It follows that K ˜ (cid:3) 1 is trivial to compute if K˜ is known . The solution to the inverse problem is then given by T (cid:1) (cid:1) FT 2 (cid:3) 1 (cid:6) K˜ (cid:3) 1 u (cid:1) ˜ (cid:7) ( 1 ) where FT 2 (cid:3) 1 denotes the ( two dimensional ) inverse Fourier transform . Explicit evaluation of the kernel in Fourier space . Implementation of Eq . 1 requires an explicit formula for K˜ ( k (cid:1) ) , the Fourier transform of the Boussinesq solu - tion K ( r ) , where r (cid:4) (cid:1) r (cid:1) (cid:1) . The forward kernel , written in matrix form , for a point source at the origin is given by Landau and Lifshitz ( 4 ) , which when reduced to x and y displacements with zero normal traction is given by K (cid:6) r (cid:7) (cid:1) A r 3 (cid:2) (cid:6) 1 (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:7) r 2 (cid:3) (cid:8) x 2 , (cid:8) xy (cid:8) xy , (cid:6) 1 (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:7) r 2 (cid:3) (cid:8) y 2 (cid:3) ( 2 ) where A (cid:4) ( 1 (cid:9) (cid:8) ) / (cid:10) E , in which (cid:8) is Poisson’s ratio and E is Young’s modulus . The components of this matrix are denoted K i , j , where the indices i and j run through ( x , y ) ; this notation will be used consistently with all matrices and vectors . Thus the two - dimensional Fourier transforms of r (cid:3) 1 , x 2 / r 3 , xy / r 3 , and y 2 / r 3 are required . These can be derived in several different ways . One especially clear method can be sketched as follows ; it relies on a generalization of the problem to three dimen - sions and a subsequent reduction to two dimensions . We begin with the singular solution to Laplace’s equation in three dimensions , (cid:11) 2 r (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) (cid:3) 4 (cid:10)(cid:12) 3 ( r (cid:1) ) , where (cid:12) is the Dirac delta function . We denote the three - dimensional Fourier transform by FT 3 , which when applied to the Laplace equation yields FT 3 ( r (cid:3) 1 ) (cid:4) 4 (cid:10) / ( k z 2 (cid:9) k 2 ) , where we separated out the wave vector k z from the wave vectors in the x , y plane ( here k 2 (cid:4) k x 2 (cid:9) k y 2 , and in what follows , k is the nonnegative square root of k 2 ) . Now note that the two - dimensional Fourier transform is the single inverse three - dimensional transform in z , eval - uated at z (cid:4) 0 , i . e . FT 2 (cid:6) f (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:6) 1 / 2 (cid:10)(cid:7) (cid:13) (cid:3)(cid:14) (cid:14) e (cid:2) ik z z FT 3 (cid:6) f (cid:7) dk z (cid:1) z (cid:1) 0 (cid:1) (cid:6) 1 / 2 (cid:10)(cid:7) (cid:13) (cid:3)(cid:14) (cid:14) FT 3 (cid:6) f (cid:7) dk z The desired answer reduces to an elementary integral FT 2 (cid:6) r (cid:3) 1 (cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:6) 1 / 2 (cid:10)(cid:7) (cid:13) (cid:3)(cid:14) (cid:14) 4 (cid:10) / (cid:6) k z 2 (cid:3) k 2 (cid:7) dk z (cid:1) 2 (cid:10) / k The other three transforms can be obtained by simple manipulations . Consider the expression (cid:15) / (cid:15) k x FT 2 [ ( (cid:15) / (cid:15) x ) r (cid:3) 1 ] . This can be evaluated in two distinct ways . First , directly differentiating with respect to x and k x yields (cid:3) i (cid:13) d 2 re i (cid:1) k (cid:1) r (cid:1) x 2 / r 3 (cid:1) (cid:3) i FT 2 (cid:6) x 2 / r 3 (cid:7) Second , integrating by parts with respect to x yields C596 FOURIER TRANSFORM TRACTION CYTOMETRY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 282 • MARCH 2002 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m (cid:15) / (cid:15) k x (cid:13) d 2 r (cid:6)(cid:3) ik x (cid:7) e ik (cid:1) (cid:1) r (cid:1) r (cid:3) 1 (cid:1) (cid:3) i (cid:6)(cid:15) / (cid:15) k x (cid:7) 2 (cid:10) k x / k where we use the transform of r (cid:3) 1 obtained above . Performing the indicated derivative with respect to k x and setting the two independent evaluations equal , we obtain FT 2 ( x 2 / r 3 ) (cid:4) ( 2 (cid:10) / k 3 ) ( k 2 (cid:3) k x 2 ) (cid:4) 2 (cid:10) k y 2 / k 2 . By symmetry , the transform of y 2 / r 3 can be written down by inspection , and the transform of xy / r 3 can be ob - tained by evaluating (cid:15) / (cid:15) k y FT 2 [ ( (cid:15) / (cid:15) x ) r (cid:3) 1 ] in the same two distinct ways as above . In summary , the desired transformed matrix is given by K˜ (cid:6) k (cid:1) (cid:7) (cid:1) A 2 (cid:10) k 3 (cid:2) (cid:6) 1 (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:7) k 2 (cid:3) (cid:8) k y 2 , (cid:8) k x k y (cid:8) k x k y , (cid:6) 1 (cid:2) (cid:8)(cid:7) k 2 (cid:3) (cid:8) k x 2 (cid:3) ( 3 ) Contraction moments . The Fourier approach also gives robust measures of certain low order moments of the tractions . The zeroth order moment of the tractions is given by (cid:13) d 2 rT (cid:1) (cid:6) r (cid:1) (cid:7) (cid:1) T (cid:1) ˜ (cid:6) k (cid:1) (cid:7) (cid:1) k (cid:1) (cid:1) 0 and is equal to the net force applied by the cell to the substrate . For isolated adherent cells , this is known a priori to be zero . However , registration shifts from one image to another of a given pair ( say before and after contractile activation ) will induce a spurious traction ﬁeld corresponding to a non - zero net force . This artifact can be trivially accounted for in Fourier space simply by setting T (cid:1) ˜ ( 0 ) (cid:4) 0 , which guarantees no net force by the cell on the substrate . The ﬁrst order moments are associated with contrac - tion / dilation tractions ( radially oriented tractions ) and tractions corresponding to torques ( circumferentially oriented tractions ) . These correspond to the four com - binations of the tractions in the x and y directions weighted by their x and y coordinates . For example , a positive traction in the y direction ( T y ) at a location with a positive x coordinate ( or a negative T y at some x (cid:16) 0 ) will contribute to a counterclockwise rotational torque through a term proportional to xT y . As a visual aid , the four terms are shown schematically in the following diagrammatic representation When symmetrized ( since the net torque conferred by the cell on the substrate must be zero ) and integrated over the surface , this is the contraction / dilation and shear moment matrix M . Written in component nota - tion , this matrix is explicitly given by M ij (cid:1) (cid:6) 1 ⁄ 2 (cid:7) (cid:13) d 2 r (cid:17) x i T j (cid:6) r (cid:1) (cid:7) (cid:3) x j T i (cid:6) r (cid:1) (cid:7)(cid:18) (cid:1) (cid:3)(cid:6) i / 2 (cid:7)(cid:17)(cid:15) T ˜ j (cid:6) k (cid:1) (cid:7) / (cid:15) k i (cid:3) (cid:15) T ˜ i (cid:6) k (cid:1) ) / (cid:15) k j ] (cid:1) k (cid:1) (cid:4) 0 ( 4 ) We approximate the derivatives by discrete differences in k space . Because T (cid:1) ˜ ( 0 ) (cid:4) 0 by construction ( to elim - inate registration artifact ) , this expression then in - volves only the Fourier transforms of the tractions at the lowest non - zero wave numbers , (cid:19) k x and (cid:19) k y . Ex - plicitly , Eq . 4 reduces to M ij (cid:1) (cid:3)(cid:6) i / 2 (cid:7)(cid:17) T˜ j (cid:6)(cid:19) k i (cid:7) (cid:3) T˜ i (cid:6)(cid:19) k j (cid:7)(cid:18) (cid:1) (cid:19) k (cid:1) ( 5 ) The interpretation of the elements of the moment ma - trix , M ij , is as follows . The total contribution of the cell to contracting the substrate in the x and y directions is given by M xx and M yy , respectively . M xy ( or M yx ) is the contribution of the cell to deformation of the substrate arising from variations in x tractions with y and vari - ations in y tractions with x . There are additional aniso - tropic contributions arising from unequal variations of x tractions with x and from y tractions with y , i . e . , when M xx (cid:20) M yy . A simple way to characterize this is to apply a rotation operator R to M such that M rot (cid:4) R (cid:3) 1 MR is diagonal , i . e . , M xy rot (cid:4) M yx rot (cid:4) 0 . This form puts all the tractions of the cell into their principal axes . The ori - entation of the principal tractions can be obtained from the x , y coordinate axes of the original images and the angle of rotation of R . This orientation of the cell is then clearly independent of the coordinate system , and may be an important measure of directionality in cell motility assays , including chemotaxis . In this context , the ratio of the principal tractions is a direct measure of the traction polarity of the cell . The net moment tending to dilate or contract the substrate is given by the trace of the moment matrix ; we thus deﬁne the net contractile moment (cid:1) of the cell by (cid:1) (cid:1) tr (cid:6) M (cid:7) (cid:1) M xx (cid:3) M yy ( 6 ) ( Here either M or M rot can be used because the trace is invariant under coordinate rotations . ) The net contrac - tile moment (cid:1) is a coordinate invariant scalar measure of the cell’s contractile “strength . ” Strain energy . The total energy U transferred from the cell to the elastic distortion of the substrate is given by U (cid:1) (cid:6) 1 ⁄ 2 (cid:7) (cid:13) T (cid:1) (cid:6) r (cid:1) (cid:7) (cid:1) u (cid:1) (cid:6) r (cid:1) (cid:7) dxdy ( 7 ) and is another measure of contractile strength . The use of Fourier analysis may involve some artifactual be - havior at the ﬁeld boundaries , which is particularly pertinent in computing the strain energy . We therefore evaluate this integral over the strict interior of the ﬁeld , i . e . , without the boundary points . Because of this , the value obtained is different from the evaluation of Eq . 7 in Fourier space with Parseval’s theorem . The source of this discrepancy lies in the use of Fourier analysis over a ﬁnite domain , wherein periodic bound - ary conditions are imposed . In general , the displace - ments at the edges of the ﬁeld of view will not approx - imate continuous periodic functions , and therefore C597 FOURIER TRANSFORM TRACTION CYTOMETRY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 282 • MARCH 2002 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m there will be artifactual tractions present along the bounding nodes of the lattice grid . These in turn will contribute to the estimated strain energy if they are included in the integral above . Such artifacts also are present in the Fourier domain , although they are in general spread over all Fourier components . It is there - fore simpler to avoid this problem by direct integration of the strain energy density over the strict interior of the domain . Limits of applicability . Note that both the FTTC method presented here as well as the DW method and that of Balaban et al . ( 1 ) explicitly approximate the elastic gel as a semi - inﬁnite medium . It has been stated that this is valid if the displacements are small compared with the gel thickness ( 3 ) , but this is not correct ( Wilson TA , personal communication ) . In fact , the ratio of displacements to gel thickness being small is a necessary ( but not sufﬁcient ) condition for the applicability of linear elasticity theory . By contrast , the use of a semi - inﬁnite elastic continuum to approximate the ﬁnite thickness gel is valid to the extent that the lateral dimensions of the cell and the lateral distances over which displacements are measured are both small compared with the gel thickness . A simple example will illustrate this . Consider the case of uniform trac - tion T over a circular region of radius R , on top of an incompressible slab of thickness h , shear modulus G , and with a ﬁxed bottom . If R (cid:16)(cid:16) h , then the gel is effectively inﬁnitely thick , the Boussinesq solution ap - plies , and the displacement of the disk is approxi - mately RT / G . By contrast , if R (cid:21)(cid:21) h , then the medium is approximately in simple shear , and the displacement of the disk is approximately hT / G . This implies that , in the latter case , the displacements will be lower than would be observed in the semi - inﬁnite medium , which in turn leads to an underestimate of the tractions . IMPLEMENTATION The implementation of all methods of computing tractions from bead displacements naturally divides into two parts . The ﬁrst is the estimation of the dis - placement ﬁeld itself on some appropriate lattice or mesh , and the second is the computation of the traction ﬁeld for that given displacement ﬁeld . This section describes these two processes . Estimating the Displacement Field From the Images To estimate the displacement ﬁeld of the substrate , we compared digital images of the same region of the gel , taken at different times . Images showed ﬂuores - cent microbeads ( 0 . 2 (cid:1) m ) embedded in the gel , before the cells were plated . In our experiments , there were usually 1 , 000 – 2 , 000 beads in an image . Images were of the size 1 , 024 (cid:5) 1 , 280 pixels . Each bead image occu - pied an area of 4 – 6 pixels in diameter , and neighboring beads were about 5 – 30 pixels apart . The processing of these images began with the cor - rection of the pair of images for relative translational shifts . Here we used the correlation theorem , which says that the Fourier transform of a correlation of two functions is a product of the Fourier transform of one function and the complex conjugate of the Fourier transform of the other function . We formed the normal - ized two - dimensional cross - correlation function be - tween the two images ( normalized by the square root of the product of the maximal values of the autocorrela - tion functions of these 2 images ) . We identiﬁed the coordinates of the peak of the correlation function and translated one of the images with respect to the other by that uniform displacement . For the calculations of the correlation functions , we utilized the two - dimen - sional fast Fourier transform ( FFT ) algorithm in MAT - LAB . Even though the images were represented by relatively large ( 1 , 024 (cid:5) 1 , 280 ) matrices , use of the correlation theorem and FFT algorithm made the ac - tual computations reasonably fast . Having the corrected images , we divided them into a number of small window areas . For these images , we chose a window size of typically 64 (cid:5) 64 pixels . The window areas overlapped ; the distance between the centers of successive windows was chosen to be 16 pixels . The displacement of each window area was then calculated by correlating a window in one image with the window at the same coordinates in the other image , in the way described above for the correlation between the whole images . The coordinates of the peak of the cross - correlation function between two windows were assigned to the center of the window as the window’s displacement vector . Repeating the same procedure over all windows yielded the uniform discretized dis - placement ﬁeld between two entire images . ( The fact that this technique yields a lattice with uniform spac - ing means that simple FFT algorithms can be used in the subsequent analysis . ) The window size of 64 (cid:5) 64 pixels was chosen to guarantee that at least one ﬂuorescent marker was located within the window , regardless of the window position . To evaluate the potential smoothing effect of widow size on the recovered traction ﬁeld , we also experimented with smaller windows down to 16 (cid:5) 16 pixels . This required us to manually eliminate win - dows that did not include ﬂuorescent markers and to substitute the missing displacements with those ob - tained from runs that employed larger windows . In the cell that we chose as an example here ( see Figs . 3 – 5 ) , smaller window sizes did not appreciably alter the recovered traction ﬁeld . Images of different gels differed in bead number and distribution . For images with a relatively low number of beads or less uniform bead distribution , there were window areas for which the computed cross - correlation was below a threshold that we set at 0 . 95 . For the displacement of such window areas , we used values obtained by ﬁtting the rest of the displacement ﬁeld by a third - order polynomial and calculating the values of the polynomial in the points of the lattice for which the value was missing . Our method of obtaining the displacement ﬁeld is different from the DW approach , which relies on the measurement of the x , y coordinates of beads in each of the two images . We encountered two difﬁculties with C598 FOURIER TRANSFORM TRACTION CYTOMETRY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 282 • MARCH 2002 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m that method . First , there is the issue of determining bead identity ; the displacement requires the initial and ﬁnal positions of the same bead . This is not a problem if bead density is low , but in attempting to achieve higher resolution with higher bead densities , some bead identities can become ambiguous ; errors here can lead to spurious displacements and , hence , artifactual tractions . Second , there may be areas on some images where beads are sparse or even absent . In this case , no estimates are possible save by interpolation from neighboring regions . Our method of maximizing the cross - correlation of small windows between the two images is less sensitive to these problems . In the ﬁrst place , if there are beads with unambiguous identity , their contrast dominates the cross - correlation function and the estimated displacements are similar to those computed by direct position measurements . However , ambiguities in any one bead identity contribute less to the displacement ﬁeld to the extent that other beads are present in the same window . This is important in areas where the bead density is high and where there may be clusters of beads with ambiguous identities . Areas with no beads also can show reasonable correla - tion between the two images , depending on the dis - placements of other features that still carry sufﬁcient contrast to be measured . Such features may include heterogeneities in the gel and embedded beads that are out of focus . In summary , the advantages of the cross - correlation approach are that it permits semiauto - mated estimates of the displacement ﬁeld and is insen - sitive to ambiguities regarding bead identiﬁcation between images . Computing the Traction Field From the Displacement Field We have implemented the solution for computing cell tractions in two distinct ways . The ﬁrst method , un - constrained FTTC , uses all displacement data from an image pair obtained as described in Estimating the displacement ﬁeld from the images , does not use any constraints on the recovered tractions , and is a direct application of the methods described in THEORY . The second method , constrained FTTC , is the solution to the mixed boundary value problem , which ignores the displacement ﬁeld outside the boundary of the cell and constrains the tractions outside the cell boundary to be zero . It is important to note that this method requires additional information beyond the displacement ﬁeld , namely , an independent estimate of the location of the cell boundary , drawn by hand . As described below , there are advantages and disadvantages to both meth - ods ; they should be viewed as complementary ap - proaches . Unconstrained FTTC . Here we use the direct solu - tion given by Eqs . 1 and 3 . The speciﬁc procedure is as follows . 1 ) Calculate the Fourier transform of the dis - crete displacement ﬁeld ( and set the Fourier component at k (cid:1) (cid:4) 0 to zero to eliminate translation artifact ) . 2 ) Multiply the transformed displacements by K˜ ( k (cid:1) ) (cid:3) 1 to map the transformed displacements to transformed trac - tions . 3 ) Take the inverse Fourier transform of the result to obtain the tractions . Constrained FTTC . This is a mixed boundary value problem , with the displacements under the cell being speciﬁed ( by measurement ) and with the tractions out - side the cell boundary speciﬁed ( by assumption ) to be zero . The Fourier approach above also can be used iteratively to solve this problem . It consists of the following procedures . 1 ) Calculate the traction ﬁeld in the way described in Unconstrained FTTC . 2 ) Deﬁne a new traction ﬁeld by setting the tractions outside of the cell boundary to zero . 3 ) Calculate the displacement ﬁeld induced by this traction ﬁeld . This is done by using the Fourier approach in a forward direction : calculate the FT of the traction ﬁeld , multiply by K˜ ( k (cid:1) ) to obtain the transformed displacements ; the inverse FT is the new displacement ﬁeld . 4 ) Deﬁne a new displacement ﬁeld by replacing the displacements of the calculated displacement ﬁeld within the cell bound - ary by the experimentally observed displacements . 5 ) Repeat steps 1 – 4 until convergence is reached at some level of tolerance . There are a variety of criteria that can be used . In our case we chose to terminate the iterative procedure when the variation in the maxi - mum magnitude of the tractions within the cell was less than 1 part in 10 6 on succeeding steps . Note that in both constrained and unconstrained FTTC , there is an ambiguity in the off - diagonal ele - ments of K˜ ( k (cid:1) ) (cid:3) 1 at the Nyquist frequency , because positive and negative Nyquist frequency components are indistinguishable but k x k y (cid:20) (cid:3) k x k y . This problem is avoided by setting the off - diagonal elements of K˜ ( k (cid:1) ) (cid:3) 1 to be zero when either k x or k y is a Nyquist frequency . EXPERIMENTAL METHODS A technique for preparation of polyacrylamide gel sheets ( 3 ) was modiﬁed and used to make ﬂexible gel disks . A mixture of acrylamide ( 2 % ) , bis - acrylamide ( 0 . 25 % ) , and ﬂuorescent latex beads ( diameter 0 . 2 (cid:1) m , 1 : 125 dilution by volume ) was added to activated glass coverslips . The droplet of the solution was covered by a small circular coverslip . After polymerization ( 45 min ) , the circular coverslip was removed . Type I collagen was attached to the surface of the gel . Gel disks were typically 50 – 70 (cid:1) m thick and had a diameter of 12 mm . The elastic modulus ( Young’s modulus ) of the gel was determined to be 1 , 200 Pa ; Poisson’s ratio was taken to be 0 . 48 . HASM cells were cultured in plastic dishes and se - rum deprived for 2 days before the experiments . Cells at passage 3 – 6 were plated on the gel disks in a serum - free medium and allowed to spread and stabi - lize for 6 h . Cells were then stimulated with histamine ( 0 . 01 mM ) for 5 min . Photomicrographs were taken of the cells both with phase - contrast optics to visualize the cells and with 470 - nm ultraviolet illumination to excite the beads , which ﬂuoresce at 515 nm . To assess the distribution of beads ( and other features with con - trast ) in the unstressed gel , the cells were detached from the substrate with trypsin ( (cid:22) 2 % ) ; this therefore C599 FOURIER TRANSFORM TRACTION CYTOMETRY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 282 • MARCH 2002 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m leaves the ﬂexible gel with no surface tractions . [ Note that the image of the traction - free gel ( i . e . , “pretreat - ment” ) is taken after the images of the posttreatment distribution of beads . ] RESULTS Figure 1 shows a phase - contrast image of a repre - sentative HASM cell , cultured on the ﬂexible polyacryl - amide gel covered with collagen type I , prepared as described in EXPERIMENTAL METHODS , after histamine treatment . Figure 2 shows a ﬂuorescence image of the same ﬁeld of view as in Fig . 1 ; the 0 . 2 - (cid:1) m beads embedded in the gel are easily visualized . Superposed on this image is the outline of the cell boundary , drawn by hand from Fig . 1 . ( This outline is drawn somewhat larger than the appearance of the cell in Fig . 1 . This is to ensure the inclusion of potential stress bearing interactions be - tween the cell and the substrate that may not be visible and to avoid interactions between the cell boundary and the discretized lattice on which the solution is deﬁned . See DISCUSSION . ) The corresponding ﬂuorescent image of the beads after cell detachment with trypsin ( pretreatment condition ) looks virtually indistinguish - able from this picture because the actual bead displace - ments are very small . Figure 3 shows the displacement ﬁeld computed from the two ﬂuorescent images of the beads pre - and posttreatment , as described in Computing the displace - ment ﬁeld from the images . The arrows in Fig . 3 show the relative magnitude and direction of the displace - ment ﬁeld of the gel under the adherent smooth muscle cell . Figure 3 also is color coded by the absolute mag - nitude of the displacements . Figure 4 shows the traction ﬁeld as computed by unconstrained FTTC , the direct computation of trac - tions from the Fourier decomposition of the displace - ments . Also shown is the boundary of cell , although it is important to note that this information was not used Fig . 1 . A phase - contrast image of a human airway smooth muscle cell , cultured on the ﬂexible polyacrylamide gel covered with collagen type I , 5 min after treatment with 0 . 01 mM histamine . Bar , 20 (cid:1) m . Fig . 2 . Fluorescence image of the same ﬁeld of view as in Fig . 1 , taken immediately after the light microscopy image in Fig . 1 . The 0 . 2 - (cid:1) m beads embedded in the gel are easily visualized . Superposed on this image is the outline of the cell , drawn by hand from Fig . 1 . Bar , 20 (cid:1) m . Fig . 3 . The displacement ﬁeld computed from the 2 ﬂuorescence images of the beads pre - and posttreatment . Arrows show the rela - tive magnitude and direction of the displacement ﬁeld of the gel under the adherent smooth muscle cell . Colors show the absolute magnitude of the displacements in (cid:1) m ( see color bar ) . Calculations were performed on a lattice with spacing of 2 . 67 (cid:1) m ( 16 pixels ) ; the color map is shown to this resolution . For visual clarity in this illustration and in those remaining , the density of arrows has been thinned to a spacing of (cid:22) 6 (cid:1) m . C600 FOURIER TRANSFORM TRACTION CYTOMETRY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 282 • MARCH 2002 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m in computing the tractions . The arrows in Fig . 4 show the relative magnitude and direction of the tractions , and the colors show the absolute magnitude of the traction vectors . Figure 5 shows the traction ﬁeld calculated by con - strained FTTC , iterating the Fourier approach until convergence was reached . Note that the tractions are zero outside the cell boundary by construction . As in Fig . 4 , the arrows show the relative magnitude and direction , and the colors show the absolute magnitude of the traction vectors . Notice ﬁrst that the maps in Figs . 4 and 5 are similar but that there is a traction concentration near the boundary of the cell computed by constrained FTTC ( Fig . 5 ) . This results from the requirement , by construction , that all tractions exte - rior to the cell must be zero . Table 1 displays the moment matrices M and M rot , the net contractile moment (cid:1) , the orientation of the principal tractions , and the strain energy U exerted by the cell as computed by unconstrained FTTC . Note that the moments are given in units of picoNewton meters ( pNm ) and energy is given in units of picoJoules ( pJ ) . We use these units to distinguish clearly between mo - ments ( forces multiplied by distances from the origin ) and energy ( forces multiplied by displacements ) , de - spite the fact that pNm and pJ are formally equivalent . Table 2 displays the same quantities as computed by constrained FTTC , with the cell boundary drawn by hand as shown in Fig . 2 . All non - zero tractions are constrained to lie within this boundary . Note that there are two methods for obtaining the moment matrices , given by Eqs . 4 and 5 ; the former is obtained by integration of the recovered tractions over the ( real ) x - y space , whereas the latter is obtained by the formal equivalent of the vector derivative of the tractions in Fourier space evaluated at the origin of k space . These two expressions in practice can be quite different . In principle , given that the moment matrix is deﬁned by an integration over real space , it might be thought that using Eq . 4 directly would be preferable , Fig . 5 . The traction ﬁeld computed from the displacement ﬁeld in Fig . 3 with the use of constrained FTTC , which solves the mixed boundary value problem of prescribed displacements within the cell boundary and zero tractions exterior to the cell . This is accomplished iteratively by using the same Fourier method until convergence is obtained . Arrows show the relative magnitude and direction of the tractions . Colors show the magnitude of the traction vectors in Pa ( see color bar ) . Fig . 4 . The traction ﬁeld computed from the displacement ﬁeld in Fig . 3 with the use of unconstrained Fourier transform traction cytometry ( FTTC ) , i . e . , the direct computation of tractions from the Fourier decomposition of the displacements . Also shown is the boundary of the cell , although it is important to note that this information was not used in computing the tractions . Arrows show the relative magnitude and direction of the tractions . Colors show the magnitude of the traction vectors in Pa ( see color bar ) . Table 1 . Moment matrices M and M rot computed by unconstrained FTTC M ij (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 2 . 83 0 . 92 0 . 92 (cid:3) 0 . 48 (cid:3) (cid:6) pNm (cid:7) M ij rot (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 3 . 15 0 0 (cid:3) 0 . 16 (cid:3) (cid:6) pNm (cid:7) Net contractile moment (cid:1) (cid:3) 3 . 3 pNm Orientation of principal tractions 19° Total strain energy U 0 . 21 pJ Moment matrices M and M rot computed by unconstrained Fourier transform traction cytometry ( FTTC ) from the traction ﬁeld shown in Fig . 4 . No assumptions are made regarding the shape of the cell or its boundary . The orientation of the principal tractions in this and Tables 2 and 3 is relative to the x - axis . Units are pNm ( pico - Newton meters ) and pJ ( picoJoules ) . Table 2 . Moment matrices M and M rot computed by constrained FTTC M ij (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 1 . 98 0 . 48 0 . 48 (cid:3) 0 . 88 (cid:3) (cid:6) pNm (cid:7) M ij rot (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 2 . 16 0 0 (cid:3) 0 . 70 (cid:3) (cid:6) pNm (cid:7) Net contractile moment (cid:1) (cid:3) 2 . 9 pNm Orientation of principal tractions 21° Total strain energy U 0 . 12 pJ Moment matrices M and M rot computed by constrained FTTC from the traction ﬁeld shown in Fig . 5 . Note that in this method , all non - zero tractions are forced to lie within the cell boundary as drawn by hand . C601 FOURIER TRANSFORM TRACTION CYTOMETRY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 282 • MARCH 2002 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m but the existence of boundary tractions associated with the Fourier decomposition in the ﬁrst place implies a potentially substantial error from the ﬁeld boundary , especially in unconstrained FTTC . By contrast , the use of the ﬁrst non - zero Fourier coefﬁcient ( Eq . 5 ) as a measurement of the moment matrix has the advantage of multiplying the entire ﬁeld by the lowest frequency sine component , thus exactly canceling the major di - pole artifact arising from the boundary of the ﬁeld of view . This is the method we use . As an aid to interpreting the relationship between the traction map and moments , we show in Fig . 6 , A and B , the displacement ﬁeld and traction ﬁeld for an artiﬁcially constructed example . The simulation con - sists of two pairs of point traction sources of different magnitudes , scaled to be similar to those seen in real cells . Note that the traction map has non - zero tractions only at the four source points , whereas the displace - ment ﬁeld is non - zero over broader regions . ( Because this is a simulation with no artiﬁcially added noise , the recovery of the traction map was identical between the unconstrained and constrained FTTC methods . ) For this simulation , the moment matrices , orientation of principal tractions , and strain energy are listed in Table 3 . This shows how the off - diagonal elements of M arise when the laboratory coordinate system does not coincide with the principal axes and how when suitably rotated ( here by (cid:22) 30° from the x - axis ) , the moment matrix becomes diagonal ( M rot ) . The fact that M xx rot and M yy rot are both negative means that , as expected from Fig . 6 , the principal tractions are contractile . The mag - nitude of M xx rot is larger than that of M yy rot , corresponding to stronger contraction along that axis . Effect of Noise in the Displacement Data With respect to questions of resolution and accuracy in the presence of noisy data , it is important to recog - nize that in the FTTC approach , noise arises only in the estimation of the displacement ﬁeld from the image pairs ; the calculation of the traction ﬁeld is , apart from round - off errors in ﬁnite word - length arithmetic , an exact procedure . There are many different methods by which to estimate the displacement ﬁeld from image pairs ; the one we have chosen ( locating peaks in the cross - correlation function on windowed regions of the two images ) is convenient for our purposes , but it is not the focus of this paper . We have , however , character - ized the effect of displacement noise on the recovered moment matrices , net contractile moment , and strain energy , as described below . We performed simulations where the displacement ﬁeld consisted of pure noise and examined the departures of the recovered moments and strain energy from zero . We performed 100 simulations using the same grid and gel characteristics as in the real images in Figs . 2 and 3 . The displacement noise was Gaussian with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 1 (cid:1) m . The traction ﬁeld was recovered by using both the unconstrained and con - strained Fourier methods , where in the constrained case we used the same cell outline as in Fig . 3 . The results of these simulations on the moment matrices , the net con - tractile moment , and the strain energy are as follows . Fig . 6 . Simulation of the displacement ﬁeld ( A ) associated with 2 pairs of point traction sources ( B ) . This artiﬁcial example corre - sponds to Figs . 3 and 4 for the real cell . The traction ﬁeld ( B ) was recovered with the use of unconstrained FTTC . The traction ﬁeld recovered with the use of constrained FTTC ( not shown ) , with a boundary of an imaginary cell shown by the white line , was indis - tinguishable from the traction ﬁeld in B . Table 3 . Moment matrices M and M rot computed by unconstrained FTTC from artiﬁcial data M ij (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 1 . 03 0 . 51 0 . 51 (cid:3) 0 . 52 (cid:3) (cid:6) pNm (cid:7) M ij rot (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) 1 . 35 0 0 (cid:3) 0 . 20 (cid:3) (cid:6) pNm (cid:7) Net contractile moment (cid:1) (cid:3) 1 . 6 pNm Orientation of principal tractions 32° Total strain energy U 0 . 11 pJ Moment matrices M and M rot computed by unconstrained FTTC from the traction ﬁeld shown in Fig . 6 B ( artiﬁcial example ) . Con - strained FTTC yielded the same results . C602 FOURIER TRANSFORM TRACTION CYTOMETRY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 282 • MARCH 2002 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m The elements of the moment matrices were not signiﬁ - cantly different from zero . This was to be expected , be - cause the tractions are linear functions of the displace - ments and the expectation values of the noise in the displacements are zero . Because this is true of all ele - ments of the moment matrices , the effect of the noise on the net contractile moment also is not signiﬁcantly dif - ferent from zero . In any given single realization , however , it is important to know the expected magnitude of the departure from zero . The standard deviation of the net contractile moment arising from pure noise , from these simulations , is 0 . 29 and 0 . 21 pNm per micrometer stan - dard deviation of displacements in the unconstrained and constrained case , respectively . The effect of noise on strain energy is quite different ; unlike the tractions ( and therefore the moments ) , which are linear functions of displacement , the strain energy is quadratic . This im - plies that the expectation value of the strain energy due to pure noise is non - zero . In our simulations , we found that the energy associated with displacement noise is 11 . 1 and 0 . 88 pJ per square micrometer of displacement variance in the unconstrained and constrained case , re - spectively . This substantial difference in strain energy in the constrained and unconstrained cases ( roughly a fac - tor of 12 ) is precisely what was expected , because the total ﬁeld area is roughly 12 times the area bounded by the cell ( Fig . 3 ) , and there is no strain energy in the gel conferred by surface tractions exterior to the cell in the constrained case . DISCUSSION Advantages and Disadvantages in Unconstrained and Constrained FTTC There are a number of advantages ( (cid:9) ) and disadvan - tages ( (cid:3) ) associated with unconstrained and con - strained FTTC . Unconstrained FTTC . ( (cid:9) / (cid:3) ) All of the observed data are used , including the displacements of beads exterior to the perceived cell boundary . The falloff in displace - ments exterior to the cell constitutes additional infor - mation regarding the overall traction ﬁeld , especially when the distribution of beads is sparse within the cell boundary . This may seem to be an obvious advantage ; it is in large measure true . However , the falloff in displacements from any particular traction source point is like 1 / r , so the information “content” of dis - placements exterior to the cell is correspondingly low , and important information may in fact not be lost . ( (cid:9) ) The cell boundary need not be identiﬁed , and , as such , no investigator judgment is necessary to identify this boundary . This is an advantage over all con - strained methods insofar as force generation associ - ated with small ﬁlopodia , ﬂat lamellipodia , or ﬁbrous connective tissue elements may be missed in the orig - inal micrograph images . ( (cid:3) ) As with all discrete Fourier problems imple - mented over a ﬁnite space , the inherent periodicity introduces artifactual tractions at the boundary of the ﬁeld because the measured displacements are not strictly periodic . To the extent that these are remote from the cell , they pose no difﬁculty . Moreover , such an artifact is equivalent to a dipole ﬁeld on the boundary , which does not strongly inﬂuence the computed cell tractions . These boundary artifacts are easy to recog - nize and can be safely ignored . ( (cid:9) ) Errors in the recovered tractions exterior to the real cell boundary , secondary to noise in the displace - ment ﬁeld , will have zero mean if the noise has zero mean . This follows from the linearity of relationship between tractions and displacements . ( (cid:3) ) By contrast , the strain energy ( which is qua - dratic in the displacements ) will be artifactually high due to the contribution of noise in the traction ﬁeld exterior to the cell . Constrained FTTC . ( (cid:3) ) If the cell is exerting non - zero tractions on the substrate at locations exterior to the perceived cell boundary , the interior tractions will necessarily be in error , because they must compensate for these tractions that were incorrectly constrained to be zero . This results in artifactually large tractions , especially in the vicinity of the imposed cell boundary . The danger here is that the large tractions at the perceived cell boundary may be interpreted mistakenly as reﬂecting real traction concentrations . ( (cid:9) / (cid:3) ) Constrained FTTC requires an iterative ap - proach , and so computational efﬁciency is not guaran - teed . In our experience , however , we have found that the iterative scheme described above typically con - verges quite quickly ( typically (cid:16) 10 iterations ) so that this approach is also not computationally intensive . ( (cid:3) ) The nature of the mixed boundary condition implies that an assessment of the noise on the ﬁnal traction ﬁeld is difﬁcult . This is because the induced level of noise depends on the boundary of the cell . ( (cid:9) ) The strain energy in constrained FTTC is conﬁned , by construction , to the interior of the perceived cell boundary , so there is no contamination of the net strain energy from noise in the exterior displacement data . There are several advantages to FTTC common to both the constrained and unconstrained implementa - tions . These include the following : ( (cid:9) ) The moment matrix is an especially simple formulation in Fourier space . No additional calculations are needed . ( (cid:9) ) The use of the FFT implies that the entire prob - lem of traction measurement is no longer computation - ally intensive ; large image pairs can be analyzed in seconds or minutes . Effect of Noise on Traction Recovery in the Example Smooth Muscle Cell Here we describe the effect of noise on our actual computations of moments and strain energy associ - ated with the smooth muscle cell shown in Figs . 1 – 5 . A comparison of the root mean square tractions ex - terior to the cell boundary with that associated with pure noise , as described in RESULTS , gives a rough estimate of the noise in the displacement ﬁeld and is a conservative estimate insofar as there appear to be patches of non - zero correlated tractions in Fig . 4 , possibly secondary to other cells exterior to the ﬁeld C603 FOURIER TRANSFORM TRACTION CYTOMETRY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 282 • MARCH 2002 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m of view . In our case , this results in an estimate of (cid:22) 0 . 05 (cid:1) m root mean square noise level in the dis - placement ﬁeld . From the pure noise simulations quoted in RESULTS , this amounts to an uncertainty in the net contractile moments of 0 . 015 and 0 . 010 pNm in the unconstrained and constrained cases , respec - tively . These numbers should be compared with those in Tables 1 and 2 , where the net contractile moment of the cell is (cid:22) 3 pNm in magnitude and shows that noise is negligible in its contribution to these estimates . By contrast , as remarked above , the strain energy is quadratic in the noise level , so displacement noise of 0 . 05 (cid:1) m corresponds to roughly 0 . 025 and 0 . 0025 pJ in the unconstrained and constrained cases , respectively . The difference in the estimated strain energies for the real cell in the unconstrained and constrained methods , from Table 1 and Table 2 , is roughly 0 . 1 pJ , and we conclude that noise may account for some quarter of this difference . Inspection of Fig . 4 , however , shows that this is also to be expected , because the patches of correlated tractions will certainly contribute to these differing estimates . Remarks on the DW Method The DW method speciﬁes both tractions ( exactly ) and displacements ( approximately ) exterior to the perceived cell boundary . This particular speciﬁcation of the problem requires special techniques because these are approximate Cauchy conditions , for which the elliptic Navier equations of elasticity in general have no solution . This is an ill - conditioned problem that necessitates smoothing or regularization to ob - tain stable solutions . The DW method utilizes the regularization method introduced by Tikhonov in the 1940s ( summarized in Refs . 8 and 9 ) with the choice of smoothing functional and level of smoothing intro - duced by Phillips ( 6 ) and Twomey ( 10 ) . In brief , the residuals of the displacement ﬁeld plus a certain amount of the L 2 norm of the gradient of the traction ﬁeld ( the regularizing functional ) are minimized , and the displacement residuals are examined . The level of smoothing is then varied until there is an appropriate level of variation in the predicted dis - placements , given a priori information about the noise in the displacement ﬁeld ( 6 ) . For problems that are highly ill conditioned , and when there are unam - biguous a priori constraints , this kind of approach is often useful and appropriate ( 2 ) . By contrast , the displacement kernel in the Boussinesq solution de - cays like r (cid:3) 1 , which is sufﬁciently rapid that in FTTC we do not ﬁnd unacceptably large oscillations in the recovered traction ﬁeld that would necessitate a Ti - khonov - type approach . Recommendations and Conclusion On the basis of the results presented , the best strategy for measuring traction ﬁeld using FTTC may be summarized as follows . An initial examina - tion of the traction ﬁeld recovered with the use of unconstrained FTTC will reveal the extent of signif - icant tractions exterior to the perceived cell bound - ary . If these can be determined to result from con - tractile cells exterior to the ﬁeld of view , the traction maps obtained with constrained FTTC may be more accurate . On the other hand , such tractions might arise from real structural elements that are not seen in phase - contrast microscopy and that are preserved in unconstrained FTTC . Whichever method is used , the traction moments are easily computed in Fourier space , whereas the strain energy is best computed with constrained FTTC , integrating over real space . If desired , the noise level in the displacement ﬁeld may be estimated by examination of its Fourier spec - trum at high frequencies , where the white noise is manifest as a constant level of intensity . In conclusion , Fourier transform traction cytometry is a new solution to the problem of mapping of the traction ﬁeld between a cell and its substrate , given the displacement ﬁeld between two micrograph images . This method has the advantages of being exact , com - putationally efﬁcient , and not subject to certain arti - facts that can lead to misleading conclusions . This approach also yields simple measures of the net con - tractile moment of the cell , the strain energy imparted to the substratum , the orientation of the principal tractions , and a quantitative index of cell polarity . FTTC may represent a new and important tool for studying the mechanical properties and function of adherent cells . We thank S . M . Mijailovich for performing ﬁnite element simula - tions of test cases early in the course of this work . We especially thank E . J . Millet and N . Wang for helpful discussions . This work was stimulated in large measure by collaboration with N . Wang on his studies of cell mechanics . We thank J . Chen for technical assis - tance in cell and gel preparations . Cells were kindly supplied by R . Panettieri . This work was supported by National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute Grant HL - P01 – 33009 . REFERENCES 1 . Balaban NQ , Schwarz US , Riveline D , Goichberg P , Tzur G , Sabanay I , Mahalu D , Safran S , Bershadsky A , Addadi L , and Geiger B . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 466 – 472 , 2001 . 2 . Butler JP , Reeds JA , and Dawson SV . Estimating solutions of ﬁrst kind integral equations with nonnegative constraints and optimal smoothing . SIAM J Numer Anal 18 : 381 – 397 , 1981 . 3 . Dembo M and Wang YL . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of ﬁbroblasts . Biophys J 76 : 2307 – 2316 , 1999 . 4 . Landau LD and Lifshitz EM . Theory of Elasticity ( 3rd ed . ) . Oxford , UK : Pergamon , 1986 . 5 . Pelham RJ and Wang YL . High resolution detection of me - chanical forces exerted by locomoting ﬁbroblasts on the sub - strate . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 935 – 945 , 1999 . 6 . PhillipsDL . Atechniqueforthenumericalsolutionofcertainintegral equations of the ﬁrst kind . J Assoc Comput Mach 9 : 84 – 97 , 1962 . 7 . Stamenovic´ D , Mijailovich SM , Tolic´ - Nørrelykke IM , Chen J , and Wang N . Cell prestress . II . Contribution of microtubules . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 : C617 – C624 , 2002 . 8 . Tikhonov AN . Solution of incorrectly formulated problems and the regularization method . Soviet Math Dokl 4 : 1035 – 1038 , 1963 . C604 FOURIER TRANSFORM TRACTION CYTOMETRY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 282 • MARCH 2002 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 9 . Tikhonov AN . Regularization of incorrectly posed problems . Soviet Math Dokl 4 : 1624 – 1627 , 1963 . 10 . Twomey S . On the numerical solution of Fredholm integral equa - tions of the ﬁrst kind by the inversion of the linear system produced by quadrature . J Assoc Comput Mach 10 : 97 – 101 , 1963 . 11 . Wang N , Tolic´ - Nørrelykke IM , Chen J , Mijailovich SM , Butler JP , Fredberg JJ , and Stamenovic´ D . Cell pre - stress . I . Rigidity and prestress are closely associated in contractile adherent cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 : C606 – C616 , 2002 . C605 FOURIER TRANSFORM TRACTION CYTOMETRY AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 282 • MARCH 2002 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 5 on A p r il 18 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m