Neurocomputing 69 ( 2006 ) 2005 – 2016 Understanding spike - time - dependent plasticity : A biologically motivated computational model Matthew Hartley (cid:1) , Neill Taylor , John Taylor Department of Mathematics , King’s College London , The Strand , London WC2R 2LS , UK Received 28 February 2005 ; received in revised form 15 August 2005 ; accepted 22 November 2005 Available online 4 July 2006 Abstract Long - term synaptic plasticity underlies many important learning processes in the brain . Recent physiological data have shown that the precise relative timings of pre - and post - synaptic neuron ﬁrings at a synapse determine both the direction of certain types of modiﬁcation ( potentiation or depression ) , and magnitude of this modiﬁcation . We propose a neurophysiological mechanism by which this spike - time - dependent plasticity ( STDP ) could arise , and support this hypothesis using a model involving calcium dynamics . We show that , in addition to reproducing experimental data for paired spikes , the model can explain differences in experimentally observed STDP forms . We also demonstrate that the model provides a good match to recent data for the triplet and quadruplet paradigms , and that a simulated network of reciprocally connected neurons using this learning rule can store and recall a simple temporal sequence . In conclusion we make predictions from the model both on the plasticity effects of quadruple spike interactions and manipulations of concentrations of components involved at the synapse . r 2006 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Spike - time dependent plasticity ; Learning ; Memory ; Sequence simulation ; Calcium dynamics 1 . Introduction Long - term synaptic modiﬁcation has been repeatedly shown to be an important mechanism for neural processing , effective in hippocampal memory acquisition , visual cortical processing and many other areas . The exact details of how this modiﬁcation depends on the ﬁring patterns of individual neurons are critical to our understanding of these processes . An early pioneer of the study of memory , Donald Hebb , proposed that episodic memory requires a form of associative learning between stimuli , and that there must be a neural correlate of this associative process [ 8 ] . For neurons , this means that when one neuron ( A ) contributes to the ﬁring of another neuron ( B ) , the synaptic strength between A and B should be increased . This form of plasticity allows networks to act as auto - associators , storing patterns and recalling those patterns from frag - ments of the original—a form of data - based memory . Previous physiological studies have shown that so called ‘‘Hebbian learning’’ occurs in some biological neural networks . However , most existing studies focus on a time - symmetrical Hebbian modiﬁcation ( so that synaptic strength from A to B increases whenever A and B ﬁre in close temporal proximity , but without dependence on the order of ﬁring ) , such that neural coding effectively depends on overall ﬁring rates . 1 . 1 . Spike - time - dependent plasticity Data from hippocampal and visual cortical neurons examining the effect of spike timing on changes in synaptic efﬁcacy show that the precise timing of pre - and post - synaptic spikes is critical to the direction and magnitude of the change in synaptic strength produced by spike association [ 3 , 17 ] , leading to the possibility of coding based on exact spike timings . For the pyramidal cells studied , spike - time - dependent plasticity ( STDP ) leads to an increase in synaptic strength if the pre - synaptic spike at a synapse precedes the ARTICLE IN PRESS www . elsevier . com / locate / neucom 0925 - 2312 / $ - see front matter r 2006 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neucom . 2005 . 11 . 021 (cid:1) Corresponding author . Tel . : + 441865510643 . E - mail address : mhartley @ mth . kcl . ac . uk ( M . Hartley ) . post - synaptic neuron’s ﬁring , and a decrease in synaptic strength if the reverse is true ( possibly with a late third phase of LTD—see below ) . The time window over which the change from negative to positive strength change occurs is very small ( approx 5 ms—see Fig . 1 ) . 1 . 1 . 1 . The differing forms of STDP The precise form of the dependence of plasticity on inter - spike interval is either not fully determined or varies depending on conditions . The form shown in [ 3 ] is different to that shown in [ 17 ] ( see Fig . 2 ) , but is very similar to that of [ 5 ] and a similar ( although not identical ) experiment on motor cortex [ 25 ] . Nishiyama et al . [ 17 ] show a signiﬁcant third phase of LTD , with both early and late LTD ( phases I and III to use the terminology in [ 17 ] ) narrower temporally than the broad LTD in [ 3 ] . Froemke and Dan’s [ 5 ] data ( taken from pyramidal neurons from adult rat visual cortical slices ) agree with that of [ 3 ] . Interestingly , the balance between LTP and LTD , reﬂected in the areas enclosed by the curves seems to be very even in both forms of STDP—this may be an important mechanism for stabilising overall neural activity . The signiﬁcant differences between these forms of causal STDP raise important questions . Are the differences signiﬁcant , or do they arise simply because of variations in experimental technique ? If they are signiﬁcant , what effect does this have on mechanisms of neural information processing ? While it is certainly the case that we can expect cells from different areas at different stages of growth to vary in plasticity behaviours ( see [ 1 ] for several examples ) , we believe that it is important to explain these differences , since they are so crucial to our proper understanding of the brain areas concerned . Additionally , other types of plasticity have similar forms to [ 17 ] involving causal plasticity , with an additional later depression phase . If we can explain the underlying principles behind these plasticity forms , we can greatly increase our understanding of plasticity processes in general . Because of this , we believe that our explanation of STDP as the interaction of competing potentiation and depression processes may be able to provide a simple explanation for at least some of the differing observed behaviours . 1 . 1 . 2 . Summary Because this phenomenon is such an important compo - nent of our understanding of the brain’s operation at a very low level , it is vital that we understand how it works , and as such , we propose a possible mechanism based on compet - ing calcium - dependent synaptic processes that can explain how STDP arises , and how differing forms might occur . We then develop a model of STDP based on this hypotheses and show that this model accurately reproduces experimental results , and that it allows a model network to store and recall a simple temporal sequence . 1 . 2 . Existing models of STDP An important similar model of STDP is given by Cooper et al . in [ 21 ] . This is based on the dynamics of Ca 2 þ inﬂow into the post - synaptic structure . Any synaptic modiﬁcation is assumed to be caused solely by voltage - dependent NMDA receptors ( NMDARs ) , changed by the pre - synaptic spike and separately by the back - propagated post - synaptic spike . These changes in Ca 2 þ concentration are then assumed to change the learning rate by means of a non - monotonic learning rate dependence on the Ca 2 þ strength ( being negative for small Ca 2 þ and positive for large Ca 2 þ ) . However , the resultant learning form is somewhat different from that of [ 3 ] , having a signiﬁcant late LTD phase when post - synaptic ﬁring occurs more than 25 ms after a pre - synaptic spike ( being therefore more like [ 17 ] , ARTICLE IN PRESS Fig . 1 . Change in synaptic strength relative to inter - spike interval ( taken from [ 3 ] ) . Fig . 2 . Change in synaptic strength relative to inter - spike interval ( taken from [ 17 ] ) . M . Hartley et al . / Neurocomputing 69 ( 2006 ) 2005 – 2016 2006 although with a considerably longer second LTD phase ) . Also , the LTP peak is wider than the LTD trough , whereas in [ 3 ] , the LTP peak is high and short , and the LTD trough long and shallow . These distinctions may be important , since a network with spontaneous uncoordinated ﬁring will develop a net increase in synaptic strengths if the area under the LTP peak is larger than that of the LTD troughs ( assuming that each pair of pre - and post - synaptic spikes produces an independent strength change ) . Another model is given in [ 20 ] , however this model concentrates on modiﬁcation of pre - synaptic vesicle release probability whereas recent research seems to suggest that post - synaptic AMPA trafﬁcking is a more likely candidate mechanism for STDP [ 16 ] . There is also the recent work of Saudargiene et al . [ 19 ] who use solely a uniﬁed AMPA / NMDA activation analysis ( without separation between LTP / LTD components as would seem to be countered by the experimental data of Lisman et al . [ 14 ] and others , and also not being based on Ca 2 þ concentrations ) and is different from our approach where the more fundamental Ca - dependent components are emphasised . The results of Saudargiene et al . [ 19 ] , like those of Shouval et al . [ 21 ] do not entirely replicate the relative sizes of the LTP and LTD peaks shown in [ 3 ] , which we believe to be important for overall activity balance . Considerable theoretical study of the consequences of STDP for network dynamics and learning stability has been carried out by Gerstner et al . [ 6 , 10 ] . This work , however , does not attempt to construct a low level model of STDP as we have done . In this paper , we develop further along the lines of Shouval et al . [ 21 ] , but base our approach only on dynamical processes involved inside the synapse , and not make any independent assumptions about the dependence of the learning rate on the Ca 2 þ concentration . We will explain the details of our neuron and plasticity models and demonstrate that the model produces results that closely match the experimental data of both [ 3 , 17 ] . We then turn to apply the STDP learning rule to the multiple spike learning data of [ 5 ] , obtaining both good results in published data and predictions as to further features , particularly on the effects of Ca 2 þ - based manip - ulations . We ﬁnally show how our learning rule achieves the storage and recall of a simple temporal sequence using a simpliﬁed model of a reciprocally connected group of neurons , as might occur in the CA3 cell ﬁeld in the hippocampus . 2 . Neuron model Since the implementation of our plasticity model depends on our neuron model , we begin by explaining the important details of this neuron model . The neuron model used is a leaky integrate - and - ﬁre spiking neuron based on that used in [ 24 ] . The neuron incorporates glutamate activated excitatory NMDA and AMPA mediated currents , GABA activated inhibitory GABA A and GABA B currents and an inactivating after - hyperpolarisation ( AHP ) current . We separate excitatory currents into those that are NMDA and AMPA mediated , because this allows modelling of the process by which NMDARs mediate synaptic strength change , but the change occurs by movement of AMPA receptor density . Also the different dynamics of NMDA and AMPA ( AMPA response is fast , occurring over approximately 2 – 5 ms , NMDA response is much slower , occurring over approximately 120 ms ) are important for the temporal response of networks . The neuron equation used is C d V d t ¼ I LEAK þ I AHP þ I NMDA þ I AMPA þ I GABA A þ I GABA B . ð 1 Þ Here where C and V are the neuron’s capacitance and membrane potential respectively , I LEAK is a leak current , negative above the neuron’s resting potential , I AHP is an inactivating AHP current , and the synaptic currents ( NMDA , AMPA and GABA A and B ) are modelled with two channel kinetic variables representing fractions of open channels , which give rise to positive ( NMDA , AMPA ) or negative ( GABA A , GABA B ) currents . The synaptic currents are calculated as ( e . g . for AMPA ) : I AMPA ¼ g AMPA s ð V (cid:1) V E Þ ( 2 ) with s representing a fraction of open channels , dependent on pre - synaptic spikes and is speciﬁed later ( Eq . ( 6 ) ) . g AMPA is the AMPA synaptic conductance . The NMDA current is voltage - dependent magnesium ion gated , calcu - lated as I NMDA ¼ g NMDA s ð V (cid:1) V E Þ 1 þ ½ Mg 2 þ (cid:2) e (cid:1) 0 : 062 V = 3 : 57 . ( 3 ) The notation is similar , here ½ Mg 2 þ (cid:2) represents a constant magnesium concentration . 3 . Plasticity equations Post - synaptic plasticity is known to be heavily dependent on calcium concentrations . One hypothesis [ 13 , 2 ] is that high concentrations of post - synaptic calcium cause poten - tiation , while concentrations that are lower but still above some threshold cause depression . A possible neurophysiological explanation for this hypothesis is that there are two competing processes ( removal and insertion of AMPA receptors , for example ) affecting synaptic strength . One of these processes causes potentiation , the other depression . When calcium concen - trations are below some threshold , neither process operates and the synaptic strength is stable . When calcium concentrations rise , the depression process begins to dominate , and LTD occurs . When calcium concentration increases even further , the potentiating process dominates and LTP occurs . ARTICLE IN PRESS M . Hartley et al . / Neurocomputing 69 ( 2006 ) 2005 – 2016 2007 Recent research [ 15 ] suggests that different types of NMDAR ( containing different subunits ) may be respon - sible for the induction of LTP and LTD , however it seems that the behaviour of these subunits differs between stages of development [ 11 ] and it is therefore unclear as to the exact effects of these subunits . It is possible that they can fulﬁl our posited roles of potentiation and depression processes . We suggest that both processes produce synaptic change when pre - synaptic pulses are paired with post - synaptic pulses and that the precise timings and characteristics of their forms result in the STDP that we observe from experimental data . 3 . 1 . Positive component The potentiation component of our STDP model represents the process of insertion of new AMPA receptors into the post - synaptic density . 3 . 1 . 1 . Post - synaptic Ca 2 þ inﬂux Calcium - CaM - dependent protein kinase II ( CaMKII ) appears to be an essential part of the NMDAR - dependent LTP process [ 14 , 22 ] , which occurs via the insertion of AMPA receptors into the post - synaptic density [ 26 ] . The complex micro - biological chain which produces this kinase is dependent on available calcium stores , so we model the quantity of available post - synaptic calcium ( which enters through magnesium - gated NMDAR mediated channels ) as dCa avail d t ¼ (cid:1) Ca avail t Ca avail þ r Ca avail s NMDA LTP 1 þ ½ Mg 2 þ (cid:2) e (cid:1)(cid:1) 60 V = 3 : 57 . ( 4 ) Here r Ca avail is the rate of Ca 2 þ inﬂux and the exponential term simulates the membrane potential dependent magne - sium block on these channels . s NMDA LTP represents the fraction of open NMDA mediated channels which permit calcium inﬂux , and is simulated as part of a two channel kinetic variable system ( as used in [ 24 ] ) : d x d t ¼ f a x X j d ð t (cid:1) t j Þ (cid:1) x = t x ! , ( 5 ) d s d t ¼ f ð a s x ð 1 (cid:1) s Þ (cid:1) s = t s Þ , ( 6 ) where the sum is over pre - synaptic spike times . Here a x and a s are constants controlling the amount by which channels are opened with each incoming transmission of vesicles . t x and t s control the rate at which the channels close , and f is a constant . 3 . 1 . 2 . Back - propagating contribution to potentiation Since the form of synaptic plasticity in which we are interested is clearly dependent on post - as well as pre - synaptic spike activity , we assume that some process that depends on back - propagating activity from the post - synaptic cell soma is also necessary for CaMKII formation . We model this process as d P LTP ; backp d t ¼ a P LTP ; backp X i d ð t (cid:1) t i Þð 0 : 9 (cid:1) P LTP ; backp Þ 2 (cid:1) P LTP ; backp t P LTP ; backp , ð 7 Þ where the sum is over post - synaptic spike times , and P LTP ; backp represents the value of some variable that depends on post - synaptic activity . a P LTP ; backp is a constant . 3 . 1 . 3 . CaMKII synthesis We then require the back - propagation activated process to be occurring in close temporal proximity to raised levels of post - synaptic Ca 2 þ to initiate the process which generates CaMKII : dCa MKII d t ¼ (cid:1) Ca MKII t Ca MKII þ Ca avail Ca LTP ; backp . ( 8 ) The time course of this variable depends on the inter - spike interval . 3 . 1 . 4 . Net potentiation This CaMKII then contributes towards providing a ‘‘scaffold’’ to which new AMPA receptors can be attached , leading us to model the rate of potentiation as d D LTP d t ¼ k LTP Ca MKII , ( 9 ) where k LTP is a constant representing the rate at which new AMPA receptors are recruited to the post - synaptic terminal . We can now examine the LTP component’s dependence on inter - spike interval in full , arriving at Fig . 3—we see that this has a fairly time asymmetric form , with rapid increase to a maximum for positive time intervals , followed by slower reduction with a long - tailed fall - off . ARTICLE IN PRESS 0 0 . 002 0 . 004 0 . 006 0 . 008 0 . 01 0 . 012 0 . 014 0 . 016 - 100 - 80 - 60 - 40 - 20 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 C hange i n sy nap t i c s t r eng t h Time difference ( s ) Fig . 3 . Potentiation component of STDP—dependence on inter - spike interval . M . Hartley et al . / Neurocomputing 69 ( 2006 ) 2005 – 2016 2008 3 . 2 . Depotentiation component The depression process represents freeing of AMPA receptors from the post - synaptic density which are then released into the intra - cellular area . Again , for the speci(cid:147)c type of plasticity that we are modelling , we require that pre - and post - synaptic activity are coordinated to produce depression . 3 . 2 . 1 . NMDAR mediated calcium dependence Previous research [ 15 ] has shown that NMDAR mediated Ca 2 (cid:254) is necessary for depression as well as potentiation , so again we model the in(cid:148)ow of calcium through magnesium - gated channels , but since the NMDAR subunits through which this calcium enters may be different from that used in the potentiation process , the variables have different values : dCa LTD pre d t … (cid:1) Ca LTD pre t Ca LTD pre (cid:254) r Ca LTD s NMDA LTD 1 (cid:254) ‰ Mg 2 (cid:254) (cid:2) e (cid:1) 0 : 062 V = 3 : 57 . ( 10 ) Again the components represent a rate of in(cid:148)ow , fraction of open channels and potential - dependent magne - sium block , however the constants involved in the fraction of open NMDA channels , s NMDA LTD , are not necessarily the same as those for the NMDA mediated potentiation process , as the NMDA subunits involved may be different . 3 . 2 . 2 . Post - synaptic membrane potential dependence Experiments have shown that LTD can be induced by clamping the post - synaptic membrane potential at an elevated point and weakly stimulating the pre - synaptic neuron . Based on this we simulate a process that depends on a depolarised post - synaptic membrane : d P dep d t … (cid:1) P dep t P dep (cid:254) 1 1 (cid:254) e (cid:1) 50 V = 3 : 57 . ( 11 ) 3 . 2 . 3 . AMPA receptor detach rate We require both elevated levels of post - synaptic calcium ( from pre - synaptic spikes ) and a depolarised post - synaptic membrane for AMPA receptor detachment to occur ( since experimental paradigms show that depression requires pre - synaptic activity ) . We therefore model this AMPA receptor detach rate as d P AMPA d t … P AMPA t P AMPA (cid:254) P dep Ca LTD pre . ( 12 ) 3 . 2 . 4 . Resultant model of depression We then de(cid:147)ne the rate of depression to be directly proportional to rate of detachment of AMPA receptors : d D LTD d t … k LTD P AMPA , ( 13 ) where k LTD is a constant representing the rate at which AMPA receptors leave the post - synaptic terminal . We can now examine the LTD component(cid:144)s dependence on inter - spike interval , which can be seen in Fig . 4 . We see that the resulting form is roughly time - symmetrical , although depression is more pronounced when the post - synaptic spike precedes the pre - synaptic spike and the maximum depression is offset slightly in the direction of positive time interval . These features result from the relative time dependencies of the component depression processes . 3 . 3 . Combining the components to give STDP To produce the resultant STDP in full , we simply add the potentiation and depression components to give D W … D W LTP (cid:254) D W LTD . ( 14 ) Simulating the total change in synaptic strength resulting from varying the time interval between single pre - and ARTICLE IN PRESS - 0 . 007 - 0 . 006 - 0 . 005 - 0 . 004 - 0 . 003 - 0 . 002 - 0 . 001 0 - 100 - 80 - 60 - 40 - 20 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Change in synaptic strength Time difference ( s ) Fig . 4 . Depotentiation component(cid:132)dependence on inter - spike interval . - 0 . 006 - 0 . 004 - 0 . 002 0 0 . 002 0 . 004 0 . 006 0 . 008 0 . 01 0 . 012 - 100 - 80 - 60 - 40 - 20 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 change in synaptic strength Time difference ( s ) and only slight potentiation for þ 5 ms = 0 ms = (cid:1) 15 ms— these are similar results , but with a slight shift towards depression . The ﬁnal experiments of interest address quadruplet spike groups . Here (cid:1) 5 ms = 5 ms pre - / post - and þ 5 ms = (cid:1) 5 ms post - / pre - pairs were used , separated by either a þ 25 or (cid:1) 25 ms interval . This design is such that either a net potentiating pair follows a net depressive pair , or vice versa . Similar to previous results , it was found that potentiation results if the potentiating pair occurs second , no signiﬁcant plasticity occurs if the potentiating pair is ﬁrst ( so potentiation for post - / pre - / post - / pre - but nothing for pre - / post - / pre - / post - ) . The results of our model again seem similar , but we obtain slight depression for the pre - / post - / pre - / post - quad . The overall conclusion from these experimental results is that potentiation dominates interactions when it is induced second , while effects cancel when potentiation is induced ﬁrst . These results seem to differ somewhat from those of Froemke and Dan [ 5 ] , who suggest that the ﬁrst pairing of an interaction dominates , such that depression will occur more often in post - / pre - / post - triplets . Certainly for the 5 ms interval pre - / post - / pre - and post - / pre - / post - triplets , the data seem to directly contradict that of [ 23 ] . Froemke and Dan use visual cortical slices , while Wang et al . use cultured hippocampal cells . Our model seems to provide a reasonable match to the results , with something of a shift towards depression occurring , although we still see the strongly asymmetic integration of potentiation and depression observed experimentally . 4 . 2 . Froemke and Dan This experimental study [ 5 ] showed that in the triplet case ( single pre - synaptic and dual post - synaptic spikes comprising the 12 case and dual pre - synaptic and single post - synaptic comprising the 2 1 case ) , the ﬁrst paired interaction dominates ( so , for example , pre - , post - , pre - will give net potentiation ) , unless the time interval between spikes in the ﬁrst interaction is large ( 4 70 (cid:1) 100 ms ) . The study also provides a wider range of data than [ 23 ] ( although individual data points are less clear ) , allowing us to make a larger comparison between model and experiment . We now compare our simulations with the experimental data shown in [ 5 ] and reproduced in Fig . 8 , where the relative timings between the single and double spikes ( t 1 being the time interval between the ﬁrst of two spikes and the single spike , t 2 being that between the second of two and the single spike—see Fig . 9D for details ) are varied and the net change in synaptic strength plotted . This comparison shows that our model can reproduce the experimental data in this case ( see Figs . 9A and B ) equally well as the reasonable ﬁt to the modiﬁcation to the original STDP data of Fig . 1 ( by multiplication by suitable activity traces ) given in [ 5 ] , but now with a more biologically realistic model ( explaining the original data of Fig . 1 as well ) . It is not possible to obtain similar results to [ 5 ] using the three phase STDP from [ 17 ] , since the third phase of LTD changes the time intervals for which LTP occurs . If this form of STDP is used , we see the results shown in Fig . 9C which differ signiﬁcantly from those found by Froemke and Dan . 4 . 3 . The quadruplet spike paradigm—simulations We also simulated the quadruplet spike paradigm ( two pre - and two post - synaptic spikes ) , ﬁxing the interval between the pre - synaptic spikes and examining the change in synaptic strength as a function of the times of the post - synaptic spikes . We show here results from simulations with pre - synaptic time intervals of 50 ms ( Fig . 10A ) , 100 ms ( Fig . 10B ) , 150 ms ( Fig . 10C ) , such that these results , and others derivable at other time intervals , are speciﬁc predictions from our model which can be veriﬁed experimentally . Qualitatively , we can see from these quadruplet para - digm results that the largest increase in synaptic strength occurs when t 1 is about 5 ms ( maximising the LTP component of the interaction with the pre - synaptic spike ) and t 2 is either positive ( a net positive interaction with the second pre - and post - synaptic spikes ) or sufﬁciently negative to also create net LTP with the ﬁrst pre - synaptic spike . As the interval between the pre - synaptic spikes increases ( to 100 ms then 150 ms ) , net positive interaction occurs for a wider range of positive t 1 ( since the added negative interaction between the ﬁrst post - and second pre - synaptic spike is weaker ) . ARTICLE IN PRESS Fig . 8 . Experimental data and model predictions for the 12 and 21 triplet spike paradigms , from [ 5 ] . The data are shown as points , where a red point denotes that potentiation occurs , and a blue point denotes depression . The axes of the plot show the relative timings of spikes ( see Fig . 9D for explanation ) . The upper pair of plots show the data ( on the left ) and model predictions ( on the right ) for the 12 case , the lower pair the 21 case . M . Hartley et al . / Neurocomputing 69 ( 2006 ) 2005 – 2016 2011 4 . 4 . Storage and recall of temporal sequences As a simple example of the consequences of differing STDP forms at the network level , we consider whether our model of plasticity provides a network with the ability to store and recall temporal information about sequences by simulating a network of reciprocally connected pyramidal cells , as might be found in the hippocampal CA3 region . 4 . 4 . 1 . The test network The test network consisted of 100 reciprocally connected pyramidal - type cells with a single inhibitory interneuron , reciprocally connected with the pyramidal cells , with connection strengths chosen to limit overall network activity . The input sequence comprised three blocks of ﬁve neurons each , presented for 50 ms with no interval between presentations ( see Fig . 11 ) . After network activity had died away , we then replayed the ﬁrst element of the sequence to determine whether the network could ‘‘ﬁll in’’ the remain - ing elements . 4 . 4 . 2 . Successful recall After an initial learning period consisting of three presentations of the input patterns , the network responded to representation of the ﬁrst pattern by producing the two remaining patterns in sequence ( Fig . 12 ) . The recall does not preserve precise temporal information , but the sequence of ﬁrings is preserved . With the Nishiyama - type learning [ 17 ] , the network was unable to reproduce the sequence of patterns , developing either too much activity ( see Fig . 13 ) or too little ( see Fig . 14 ) —it appears that the second , late LTD phase interferes with this type of sequence learning . We examined the network’s performance on longer sequences , but found that recall was poor for more than 3 – 4 patterns . In the real hippocampus , it likely that temporal sequence learning and recall operates by a more complex mechanism , including theta - rhythm control of learning and playback [ 7 ] , however the preservation of temporal information by the STDP learning mechanism is likely an important component of sequence processing . ARTICLE IN PRESS Fig . 9 . Our model simulation results for triplet spike paradigm changes , in synaptic strength , plotted in the same style as the results of [ 5 ] shown in Fig . 8 . Axes show relative timings in milliseconds . ( A ) is the 12 paradigm , ( B ) the 21 paradigm , ( C ) shows the 12 paradigm using the style of learning from Nishiyama et al . [ 17 ] , ( D ) explains the variables used for plotting . M . Hartley et al . / Neurocomputing 69 ( 2006 ) 2005 – 2016 2012 ARTICLE IN PRESS Fig . 10 . Our simulated results for the change in synaptic strength for 22 quadruplet spike paradigms . ( A ) gives the results when the ﬁxed interval is 50ms , ( B ) when it is 100ms , ( C ) 150ms , ( D ) explains the labelling of the ﬁgure . Fig . 11 . Presentation of patterns to be learned . Fig . 12 . Replay of learnt patterns ( using Bi and Poo learning , from [ 3 ] ) . Fig . 13 . Attempted replay of learned patterns that fails due to over - learning in the network ( with Nishiyama learning , from [ 17 ] ) . M . Hartley et al . / Neurocomputing 69 ( 2006 ) 2005 – 2016 2013 4 . 5 . Predictions for experimental data 4 . 5 . 1 . Separation of components Since we separate plasticity into potentiation and depression components , we can predict that if these components could be separated , they would have the forms shown in Fig . 7 . In our model we assume that , while the LTP component depends on post - synaptic CaMKII , the LTD component does not . While CaMKII is important for some forms of synaptic depression [ 18 ] , there does not appear to be any evidence that it is required for the depression component of STDP , in fact experiments have shown that when CaMKII expression is impaired , the balance between LTP and LTD is broken and increased overall depression occurs [ 4 ] . Therefore , we would expect that with some form of CaMKII inhibition , examination of the change in synaptic strength relative to the timing of pre - and post - synaptic ﬁring would have the form shown in the lower curve of Fig . 7 . We note that the methods of [ 22 ] ( which control CaMKII availability by inducible protein knockout ) appear eminently suitable for exploring this prediction . Also recent work has examined the roles of speciﬁc AMPA receptors in synaptic depression [ 12 ] —if manipulation of these subunits is possible , the potentiation component of plasticity could be isolated . 4 . 5 . 2 . Differing forms of STDP It is important that the issue of differing forms of STDP be addressed in experiment , to determine under precisely what circumstances the different forms of STDP are observed , and what parameters control the characteristics of these forms of STDP . It is not currently clear from experiment why the differing forms of plasticity shown in [ 3 , 17 ] exist and what determines their form . Since there seem to be more data in support of the Bi and Poo style learning , it may be that the Nishiyama style arises from certain specialised condi - tions , although our model offers an explanation of the differences . The primary parameters in our model that determine the form of STDP that arises are the time constants of the potentiation and depression processes and their subcomponents . In real neurons , these changes might arise because of varying rates of calcium inﬂow and outﬂow , shapes of back - propagating action potentials and other effects ( such as the variable kinetics of the NMDA magnesium block [ 9 ] ) . Suitable changes to these time constants allow us to model both the Bi and Poo [ 3 ] and Nishiyama [ 17 ] forms of potentiation . It may therefore be possible to manipulate the time constants of synaptic processes ( such as calcium inﬂow and outﬂow ) , and examine the effects of this manipulation of the form of STDP produced . If this could be done , we predict that these time constants can determine the shape of the STDP curve produced , and may be able to explain why the Nishiyama form of plasticity is so different from that of Bi and Poo . 5 . Conclusion We have suggested that STDP arises due to the interaction of competing potentiation and depression processes at the post - synaptic density , and demonstrated that a model of these processes using low level calcium dynamics can reproduce important experimental results showing STDP in real neurons , both with paired , triplet and quadruplet spikes , although some of our results differ slightly from one experimental study . We have also proposed that the differing forms of plasticity found from experiment could be due to small differences in the timings of synaptic processes due to a range of effects , and that these changes can act in such a manner as to cause the functional differences found experimentally . We support this hypothesis by demonstrat - ing that varying the parameters in our model allows it to replicate two different sets of observed data for STDP in [ 3 , 17 ] . We also showed that a simple network using the learning model can store and then replay a simple temporal sequence of patterns , and that the different STDP forms could have important effects on large - scale network activity . The model also allows further exploration of the protein - dependent mechanisms underlying the phenomenon of STDP and should allow simulation of the effects on these mechanisms of neuromodulation and neuronal damage , both important to our better understanding of the function of the brain . As an example of this , we predict the form of spike - time - dependent synaptic depression in the absence of CaMKII . Acknowledgements M . H . would like to thank Lobal Technologies and N . T . the EPSRC for ﬁnancial support for this research . ARTICLE IN PRESS Fig . 14 . Attempted replay of patterns that fails due to under - learning in the network ( with Nishiyama learning , from [ 17 ] ) . M . Hartley et al . / Neurocomputing 69 ( 2006 ) 2005 – 2016 2014 Appendix A A . 1 . Values of constants Table A . 1 gives the values of relevant constants , demonstrating the differences between the two types of learning . References [ 1 ] L . F . Abbott , S . B . Nelson , Synaptic plasticity : taming the beast , Nat . Neurosci . 3 ( 2000 ) 1178 – 1183 . [ 2 ] A . Artola , S . Brocher , W . Singer , Different voltage - dependent thresholds for inducing long - term depression and long - term potentia - tion in slices of rat visual cortex , Nature 347 ( 1990 ) 69 – 72 . [ 3 ] G . Q . Bi , M . M . Poo , Synaptic modiﬁcations in cultured hippocampal neurons : dependence on spike timing , synaptic strength and postsynaptic cell type , J . Neurosci . 18 ( 1998 ) 10464 – 10472 . [ 4 ] Y . Elgersma , et al . , Inhibitory autophosphorylation of CaMKII controls PSD association , plasticity , and learning , Neuron 36 ( 2002 ) 493 – 505 . [ 5 ] R . C . Froemke , Y . Dan , Spike - time - dependent synaptic modiﬁcation induced by natural spike trains , Nature 416 ( 2002 ) 433 – 438 . [ 6 ] W . Gerstner , W . Kistler , Mathematical formations of Hebbian learning , Biol . Cybern . 87 ( 2002 ) 404 – 415 . [ 7 ] M . E . Hasselmo , B . P . Wyble , Free recall and recognition in a network model of the hippocampus : simulating the effects of scopolamine on human memory function , Behav . Brain Res . 89 ( 1997 ) 1 – 34 . [ 8 ] D . O . Hebb , The Organization of Behavior , Wiley , New York , 1949 . [ 9 ] B . M . Kampa , J . Clements , P . Jonas , G . J . Stuart , Kinetics of Mg 2 þ unblock of NMDA receptors : implications for spike - timing dependent synaptic plasticity , J . Physiol . 556 ( 2004 ) 337 – 345 . [ 10 ] R . Kempter , W . Gerstner , J . L . van Hemmen , Intrinsic stabilization of output ﬁring rates by spike - based Hebbian learning , Neural Comput . 13 ( 2001 ) 2709 – 2741 . [ 11 ] G . Kohr , et al . , Intracellular domains of NMDA receptor subtypes are determinants for long - term potentiation induction , J . Neurosci . 23 ( 2003 ) 10791 – 10799 . [ 12 ] S . H . Lee , A . Simonetta , M . Sheng , Subunit rules governing the sorting of internalized AMPA receptors in hippocampal neurons , Neuron 43 ( 2004 ) 221 – 236 . [ 13 ] J . Lisman , A mechanism for the Hebb and anti - Hebb processes underlying learning and memory , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 86 ( 1989 ) 9574 – 9578 . [ 14 ] J . Lisman , H . Schulman , H . Cline , The molecular basis of CaMKII function in synaptic and behavioural memory , Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 3 ( 2002 ) 175 – 190 . [ 15 ] L . Liu , et al . , Role of NMDA receptor subtypes in governing the direction of hippocampal synaptic plasticity , Science 304 ( 2004 ) 1021 – 1024 . [ 16 ] R . Malinow , R . C . Malenka , AMPA receptor trafﬁcking and synaptic plasticity , Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 25 ( 2002 ) 103 – 126 . [ 17 ] M . Nishiyama , K . Hong , K . Mikoshiba , M . M . Poo , K . Kato , Calcium stored regulate the polarity and input speciﬁcity of synaptic modiﬁcation , Nature 408 ( 2000 ) 584 – 588 . [ 18 ] K . G . Pratt , et al . , Activity - dependent remodeling of presynaptic inputs by postsynaptic expression of activated CaMKII , Neuron 39 ( 2003 ) 269 – 281 . [ 19 ] A . Saudargiene , B . Porr , F . Worgotter , How the shape of pre - and post - synaptic signals can inﬂuence STDP : a biophysical model , Neural Comput . 16 ( 2004 ) 595 – 625 . [ 20 ] W . Senn , H . Markram , M . Tsodyks , An algorithm for modifying neurotransmitter release probability based on pre - and postsynaptic spike timing , Neural Comput . 13 ( 2001 ) 35 – 67 . [ 21 ] H . Z . Shouval , M . F . Bear , L . N . Cooper , A uniﬁed model of NMDA receptor - dependent bidirectional synaptic plasticity , PNAS 99 ( 2003 ) 10831 – 10836 . [ 22 ] H . Wang , et al . , Inducible protein knockout reveals temporal requirements of CaMKII reactivation for memory consolidation in the brain , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 ( 2003 ) 4287 – 4292 . [ 23 ] H . - X . Wang , R . C . Gerkin , D . W . Nauen , G . - Q . Bi , Coactivation and timing - dependent integration of synaptic potentiation and depres - sion , Nat . Neurosci . 8 ( 2005 ) 187 – 193 . [ 24 ] X . - J . Wang , Synaptic basis of cortical persistent activity : the importance of NMDA receptors to working memory , J . Neurosci . 19 ( 1999 ) 9587 – 9603 . [ 25 ] A . Wolters , et al . , A temporally asymmetric Hebbian rule governing plasticity in the human motor cortex , J . Neurophysiol . 89 ( 2003 ) 2339 – 2345 . [ 26 ] W . - L . Yu , et al . , Activation of synaptic NMDA receptors induces membrane insertion of new AMPA receptors and LTP in cultured hippocampal neurons , Neuron 29 ( 2001 ) 243 – 254 . Matthew Hartley obtained his BA and MSc in Experimental and Theoretical Physics from the University of Cambridge . His PhD from the University of London was entitled ‘‘Mechanisms of memory and plasticity in the hippocampus : a simulation approach’’ , and focussed on computa - tional neuroscientiﬁc approaches to understand - ing the hippocampus . Since completion of his PhD , he has worked on projects involving the learning of visual attention and motor skills . His research interests include spike - time - dependent plasticity , the hippocam - pus and episdodic memory and learnt attention . ARTICLE IN PRESS Table A . 1 Values of constants Variable name Bi / Poo learning Nishiyama learning Units ( where applicable ) k LTP 1000 400 k LTD (cid:1) 0 . 1 (cid:1) 0 . 1 a x AMPA 1 1 t x AMPA 0 . 05 0 . 05 ms a s AMPA 0 . 001 0 . 001 t s AMPA 0 . 002 0 . 002 ms a x NMDA 1 1 t x NMDA 2 2 ms a s NMDA 0 . 3 0 . 3 t s NMDA 10 15 ms t Ca avail 5 . 0 2 . 5 ms r Ca avail 1 1 ½ Mg 2 þ (cid:2) 1 1 a P LTP 1 1 t P LTP 1 2 ms t Ca MKII 1 2 ms t Ca LTD pre 5 12 ms r Ca LTD 5 5 ms t P LTD 50 40 ms t P AMPA 20 10 ms M . Hartley et al . / Neurocomputing 69 ( 2006 ) 2005 – 2016 2015 Neill R . Taylor obtained his BSc in Mathematics from King’s College , University of London , and his PhD in Artiﬁcial Neural Networks from the University of London . He is a post - doctoral research associate in the Department of Mathe - matics at King’s College London . His research interests include : visual attention , spike - time - dependent plasticity , cerebellum , basal ganglia and dopamine . John G . Taylor is an Emeritus Professor of Mathematics at King’s College London . He has an extensive background of research , with over 300 published papers , ﬁrstly in theoretical physics and later in wide ranging aspects of neural networks . His current research interests include the many ways in which attention operates in the brain , and the ‘‘relational’’ theory of consciousness . ARTICLE IN PRESS M . Hartley et al . / Neurocomputing 69 ( 2006 ) 2005 – 2016 2016