AJS Volume 107 Number 2 ( September 2001 ) : 379 – 429 379 (cid:1) 2001 by The University of Chicago . All rights reserved . 0002 - 9602 / 2001 / 10702 - 0004 $ 10 . 00 Middle - Status Conformity : Theoretical Restatement and Empirical Demonstration in Two Markets 1 Damon J . Phillips University of Chicago Ezra W . Zuckerman Stanford University This article aims to reestablish the long - standing conjecture that conformity is high at the middle and low at either end of a status order . On a theoretical level , the article clariﬁes the basis for ex - pecting such an inverted U - shaped curve , taking care to specify key scope conditions on the social - psychological orientations of the ac - tors , the characteristics of the status structure , and the nature of the relevant actions . It also validates the conjecture in two settings that both meet such conditions and allow for the elimination of con - founding effects : the Silicon Valley legal services market and the market for investment advice . These results inform our understand - ing of how an actor’s status interacts with her role incumbency to produce differential conformity in settings that meet the speciﬁed scope conditions . INTRODUCTION A compelling paradox captured much sociological and social - psycholog - ical attention at midcentury : the idea that conformity is high in the middle yet low at the top and bottom of a status hierarchy . Following dramatic evidence of social inﬂuence on individual judgment ( e . g . , Asch 1951 ; Fes - 1 We are grateful for feedback from seminar audiences at Stanford Business School , Columbia Business School , Harvard Business School , and Olin Business School as well as the guidance provided by Bill Barnett , Jim Baron , Roberto Fernandez , John Freeman , Mike Hannan , Pam Haunschild , Ed Laumann , Joel Podolny , Ray Reagans , Garth Saloner , Rob Sampson , and Toby Stuart . Of course , we alone are responsible for the errors that remain . Please direct correspondence to Damon J . Phillips , Graduate School of Business , University of Chicago , 1101 East 58th Street , Chicago , Illinois 60637 . E - mail : Damon . Phillips @ gsb . uchicago . edu American Journal of Sociology 380 tinger , Schachter , and Back 1950 ; Sherif 1935 ) , a series of studies indicated that the force of such social control varies , producing an inverted U - shaped ( IUS ) relationship between status and conformity ( Blau 1960 , 1963 ; Dittes and Kelley 1956 ; Harvey and Consalvi 1960 ; Homans 1961 ; Menzel 1960 ; see also Ranulf 1938 ) . As explained by Dittes and Kelley ( 1956 ) , conformity increases as actors value their membership in a group yet feel insecure in that membership . Since high - status actors feel conﬁdent in their social acceptance , they are emboldened to deviate from conventional behavior ( Hollander 1958 , 1960 ) . At the same time , low - status actors feel free to defy accepted practice because they are excluded regardless of their ac - tions . Finally , in contrast to the relative freedom experienced by high - and low - status actors , middle - status conservatism ( compare Homans 1961 , pp . 357 – 58 ) reﬂects the anxiety experienced by one who aspires to a social station but fears disenfranchisement . Such insecurity fuels con - formity as middle - status actors labor to demonstrate their bona ﬁdes as group members . Interestingly , despite its intuitive appeal and advocacy by prominent scholars , the conjecture of an IUS relationship between status and con - formity never gained wide acceptance , and relevant research all but ceased in the 1970s . Studies of the diffusion of innovation devoted the most sustained attention to this idea , in the form of tests of a U - shaped rela - tionship between status and innovation . But such tests generated contra - dictory ﬁndings that were never resolved . In particular , medical diffusion researchers favored an elaboration of this U - shaped curve proposed by Blau ( 1963 , p . 202 ; also see Marsh and Coleman 1956 ; Menzel 1960 ) and supported by Becker ( 1970 ) ; that is , high - status actors are more likely to adopt innovations that mesh with prevailing group norms , while low - status actors originate counternormative innovations . By contrast , agri - cultural diffusion scholars discarded the notion of such a U - shaped re - lationship upon ﬁnding that groups of low socioeconomic status ( SES ) lag in adopting innovations . Instead , debate raged over whether the pos - itive relationship between SES and innovation is linear or cubic ( Cancian 1967 , 1979 ; Gartrell 1977 ) . The IUS conjecture also failed to gain ﬁrm footing in other relevant research traditions . For instance , while social psychologists were promi - nent contributors to early work on this idea ( e . g . , Dittes and Kelley 1956 ; Harvey and Consalvi 1960 ; Hollander 1958 , 1960 ) , they subsequently shifted focus from the question of how status determines action to the analysis of the ways various actions and characteristics confer status or inﬂuence ( e . g . , Moscovici and Nemeth 1974 ; Ridgeway 1978 , 1981 ; Wahr - man and Pugh 1972 , 1974 ) . At the same time , network research has cen - tered on the channels through which social contagion occurs rather than on variation in susceptibility to contagion ( e . g . , Marsden and Friedkin Middle - Status Conformity 381 1993 ; but see Galaskiewicz and Burt 1991 , p . 100 ) . Finally , the idea of an IUS relationship between status and conformity never attractedinterest in the criminological literature despite comments and ﬁndings that are consistent with such an idea ( Nye , Short , and Olson 1958 ; Matza and Sykes 1961 , p . 715 ; Hagan , Gillis , and Simpson 1985 , p . 1155 ; Jensen and Thompson 1990 , p . 1017 ; also see Veblen [ 1899 ] 1960 , p . 160 ) . Indeed , the very notion of white - collar crime ( Sutherland 1983 ) echoes the distinction between normative and counternormative innovation found in the med - ical diffusion literature . Nevertheless , debate in criminology has been framed around the question of whether the relationship between class and deviance is linear ( e . g . , Tittle , Villemez , and Smith 1978 ; Jensen and Thompson 1990 ; Tittle and Meier 1990 ; Hagan 1992 ) rather than whether there might be a curvilinear association between status and deviance . The failure of the IUS conjecture to take hold likely stems from inter - related theoretical and empirical difﬁculties . Theoretically , the assumption of three social ranks—high , middle , and low—is troubling because it seems rather arbitrary . Any well - developed theory on the relationship between status and conformity must clarify why there could not be more or fewer statuses . Perhaps the most serious theoretical difﬁculty with the IUS hy - pothesis derives from a failure to delineate clear scope conditions and deﬁne key concepts , thus dooming it to contradictory results . For example , the mixed ﬁndings in the diffusion literature might lead one to reject the IUS conjecture . However , it is possible that differences in operationali - zation—for example , the variables taken as indicators of innovation and status—may account for the different ﬁndings . Without clearer guidelines on applying the IUS conjecture in particular contexts , contradictory re - sults are inevitable . The main empirical challenge to demonstrating an IUS curve relation - ship between status and conformity lies in disentangling the effects of status from those of other stratifying variables . For example , to the extent that status correlates with quality or ability and the behavior in question is regarded as an indicator of performance , middle - ranked actors may appear to act more conventionally simply because such actors perform at an average level . 2 Similarly , if the action in question requires the posses - sion of certain resources and higher status actors are more resourceful , then the lowest rank’s failure to conform may simply reﬂect an inability , rather than a lack of social pressure , to do so ( Han 1994 ) . Finally , effects 2 Below , we also discuss recent economic models that have proposed speciﬁc theories of “herding” and “countersignalling” based on differences in ability . American Journal of Sociology 382 of social rank can often be attributed to differences in information access . 3 To the extent that high - and low - ranked actors have more extragroup ties than do those of the middle rank , they enjoy greater exposure to alter - native practices and are thus more likely to adopt them ( Weimann 1982 ) . In this article , we aim to shed greater light on the relationship between status and conformity . First , we develop a theoretical framework that addresses the central difﬁculties in past formulations . The heart of our model is the observation that an actor may occupy only one of three possible locations with respect to a given social boundary that divides the members and nonmembers of a desirable social designation : one may be on the inside , on the outside , or on the dividing line . Those who straddle this boundary—actors who tend to be viewed as middling in status—work feverishly to solidify their social standing by demonstrating their con - formity with accepted practice . A key feature of our theoretical restatement of the IUS conjecture is the identiﬁcation of scope conditions on actors’ social - psychological ori - entations , on the nature of the status hierarchy , and on the type of actions involved . Such restrictions appear to deﬁne a rather narrow range of contexts in which it is appropriate to expect a curvilinear relationship between status and conformity . Accordingly , the second objective of this article is to analyze two settings that do fall within this range—the Silicon Valley legal market and the market for investment advice—and to ex - amine two relevant actions—the opening of a family law practice and the issuing of a “sell” recommendation . These settings are attractive because they allow for the examination of the effect of social rank independent of other stratifying variables . In addition , as we discuss below , economic markets such as the ones we study are relatively simple social settings that are more likely to satisfy the scope conditions . Ironically , while the IUS curve has not previously been documented in a market context , our analysis suggests that the market constitutes a particularly good setting in which to explore traditional sociological thinking on status and role dynamics . 4 In what follows then , we pursue two objectives : ﬁrst , to rees - tablish the IUS conjecture , being careful to provide scope conditions and 3 A related problem is that an actor’s status , which reﬂects position in networks of evaluation , typically correlates with his integration or centrality in networks of inter - action ( Burt 1982 , pp . 199 – 203 ; Coleman , Katz , and Menzel 1966 , pp . 111 – 12 ) . Indeed , many scholars use status and integration interchangeably ( e . g . , Blau 1960 ; Menzel 1960 ; Becker 1970 ) . 4 The partial exception is Han ( 1994 ) . However , Han understands his results as re - ﬂecting an opinion - leadership process . In addition , his analysis of the selection of auditors cannot disentangle the effect of status from that of differential resources . Nevertheless , his analysis is largely consistent with the IUS curve . Middle - Status Conformity 383 guidelines for empirical application , and second , to demonstrate its pres - ence in two markets that do fall within that range . THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK The Candidate - Audience Interface Following Zuckerman ( 1999 , pp . 1401 – 3 ) , consider an interface between one set of actors , termed candidates , who seeks entry into relations with a second set of actors , termed the audience . Candidates present offers to the audience , and the latter select their preferred offer . That is , candidates and audience members stand opposite one another in a role relationship in which a candidate’s role incumbency is contingent , not given . Can - didates compete with one another to align their “announcements” of iden - tity with the audience’s “placements” ( see Stone 1962 ) . It is useful to characterize the audience’s selection process as consisting of two ideal - typical phases , which are mirrored in two stages of candidate behavior . 5 In the ﬁrst stage , the ﬁeld is set . In order to make their choice , audience members must be able to compare competing offers with one another . To the extent that a given offer hinders the audience’s ability to calibrate an offer against the others , it will be screened out of competition and ignored . Such offers are impure ( Douglas 1966 ) or illegitimate ( Meyer and Rowan 1977 ; DiMaggio and Powell 1983 ) in the sense that they threaten the existing system of classiﬁcation . The need for comparability is such that the interface collapses if offers are so different from one another as to make cross - offer comparison impossible ( White 1981 a ) . Thus , rather than optimizing over the full menu of alternatives , the au - dience limits its attention to a discrete consideration set of like alternatives ( e . g . , Shocker et al . 1991 ; Urban , Weinberg , and Hauser 1996 ) . This choice process on the part of the audience pressures candidates to orient their offers to the comparative frame employed by the audience . In order to have a chance at having its offer accepted , a candidate must demonstrate that its offer conforms to the criteria that deﬁne members of the audience’s consideration set , lest it be ignored as unintelligible . The second phase begins once illegitimate offers have been eliminated and only those candidates recognized as full - ﬂedged players remain . At this point , audience members compare the players’ offers with one another and select the one they perceive as best . Mirroring such triage , players labor to distinguish their offers from one another to gain selection by 5 While we discuss the two phases as occurring sequentially through time , this is a conceptual distinction rather than an empirical one . The stages of conformity / classi - ﬁcation and differentiation / evaluation are temporally intertwined . American Journal of Sociology 384 audience members . Whereas the ﬁrst stage of competition induces con - formity , the second generates differentiation . As stressed by Simmel ( [ 1904 ] 1971 , p . 297 ) , conformity and differentiation stand in a dialectical rela - tionship to one another ( compare Hewitt 1989 ) . Conformity on common standards and shared understandings enables individual differentiation to occur . Generating the IUS Curve The IUS relationship between status and conformity may be derived from two amendments to the candidate - audience interface . First , we assume that a candidate’s present location along the interface depends not only on her actions , but also on her prior location . Such an assumption is consistent with the observation made in many economic markets , where entry barriers privilege the early mover and hinder the latecomer’s efforts at establishing a presence ( e . g . , Saloner , Shepard , and Podolny 2001 , chap . 9 ) . Particularly relevant here are barriers that derive from the socio - cognitive capacity constraints on audience consideration sets . 6 As White and Eccles point out ( 1987 , p . 984 ) , the operation of an interface “require ( s ) small numbers” because “the complexity of making . . . comparisons [ among players ] grows geometrically as the number of [ players ] grows arithmetically” ( compare Miller 1956 ; see Goode [ 1979 , pp . 72 – 75 ] and Frank and Cook [ 1995 , p . 3 ] for application to status structures ) . Social networks that separate audiences from a would - be player further reinforce such barriers ( Podolny 1993 , pp . 832 – 33 ) . Thus , it is often the case that candidate locations are stable from one period to the next . The second assumption we make is that the audience’s classiﬁcation of candidates entails a ranking of such actors . That is , if audience members rate candidates in terms of their appeal , the resulting hierarchy indicates a candidate’s position along the interface . Players enjoy greater esteem in the eyes of the audience than do peripheral players ; the latter are of higher status than are nonplayers . Figure 1 , which elaborates on ﬁgure 1 in Zuckerman ( 1999 ) , illustrates this idea . The audience’s ranking of candidates places full - ﬂedged players at the top , peripheral players in the middle , and mere candidates at the bottom . We depict the edge of the interface as relatively porous , thus dramatizing the anxiety of middle - status candidates as a state in which the prospect of classiﬁcation as a full - ﬂedged player and the threat of delegitimation both loom large . By 6 The constraints are social as well as cognitive in the sense that while a given actor restricts her consideration set to a small number of alternatives , the makeup of that consideration set tends to be extracted from the prevailing consideration set—or prod - uct category—in the market ( Zuckerman 1999 , pp . 1403 – 4 ) . Middle - Status Conformity 385 Fig . 1 . —Status and conformity in the candidate - audience interface contrast , high - status players are secure in their identity as players , and the lowest status candidates are effectively screened out of consideration . While they occupy opposite ends of the status scale , the highest and lowest ranked candidates are both relatively ﬁxed in their identities : the ﬁrst is a player , the second is not . These assumptions carry an important implication : to the extent that a candidate’s identity is ﬁxed , her actions cannot alter that identity . Thus , consider an action that the audience generally uses to ascertain who is a player . Clearly , any candidate who wishes to gain recognition as a player will feel pressure to conform to audience expectations concerning such an action . But if the low - status candidate is eliminated from consideration , regardless of her behavior , she gains nothing from conformity . Conversely , if the recognition of a high - status candidate is beyond doubt , there is likewise no reason for him to conform . That is , an actor’s status may override her actions as a basis for establishing her identity . An action that ordinarily constitutes evidence that one is illegitimate will be dis - regarded when taken by someone whose legitimacy—or illegitimacy—is unquestioned . Moreover , if any beneﬁt may be derived from undertaking the action , high - and low - status actors should be more likely to do so : neither of them has anything to lose . This act of nonconformity may serve as a basis for differentiation for the high - status player or provide some other type of beneﬁt to either candidate . What is common to both , how - ever , is freedom from the pressure to conform . In sum , as depicted in American Journal of Sociology 386 ﬁgure 1 , an inverted U - shaped curve between status and conformity ensues . It should be evident at this point that the three classes of the IUS curve have not been chosen arbitrarily . Rather , since social boundaries generally exhibit considerable permeability , there exist only three possible locations an actor can occupy with respect to a given boundary—he can straddle it or reside on either side of it . Further , the idea of two kinds of noncon - formity at the top and bottom of a hierarchy ( Blau 1963 ; Becker 1970 ; see also Menzel 1960 ) is quite consistent with the framework developed here . Since high - status actors derive great beneﬁt from their recognition as players in the interface , their nonconformity should be of a rather limited sort . By contrast , low - status actors , as outsiders to the interface , are indifferent or even hostile to prevailing practice . As such , they are more open to altering the rules of the game and are less interested in change that reinforces the status quo ante . This difference may be ex - pressed via the differential tendency to attach a disclaimer to deviance ( see also Hewitt and Stokes 1975 ) : while both high - and low - status actors deviate more often , the former may qualify their departure from conven - tion by signaling to the audience not to interpret it as a sign that they are no longer players . Middle - status actors , by contrast , should feel less secure that a disclaimer will be recognized as such . Theoretical Clariﬁcations and Scope Conditions It is important to emphasize that our theoretical framework for predicting an IUS relationship between status and conformity does not speak to possible relationships between other stratifying variables and conformity . To the extent that such effects exist , they must either reﬂect an underlying association with status or are due to other causal mechanisms than that responsible for the IUS curve—that is , the differential tendency to dem - onstrate membership in a desirable social designation . Of course , status tends to be strongly associated with such variables as class and power in real - world settings . But following Weber ( [ 1922 ] 1946 ) , it is useful to regard social status , or the amount of honor or esteem accorded to a person or social designation , as distinct from these and other variables . Accordingly , analyses that use SES or class to predict behavior ( e . g . , Cancian 1967 , 1979 ; Gartrell 1977 ) have no clear implications for the relationship be - tween status and conformity . Similarly , while recent economic models focus on the relationship between an actor’s ability or quality and her tendency to engage in “herding” ( see Scharfstein and Stein 1990 ; Zwiebel 1995 ) or “counter - signaling” ( Feltovich , Harbaugh , and To 1999 ) , our ap - proach follows long - standing sociological tradition in asserting that an actor’s status is often weakly related to her ability ( e . g . , Berger et al . 1977 ; Middle - Status Conformity 387 Podolny 1993 ) . 7 The basis for the IUS curve lies not in intrinsic attributes , which tend to be opaque , but in the social psychological dispositions characteristic of particular structural positions , which are generally quite visible and stable . At the same time , it is critical that any empirical ex - amination of the IUS curve control for relevant stratifying variables either through the research design or through the use of statistical controls . In considering our proposed theoretical framework , it is notable that , while classic studies of conformity generally took place in small groups ( e . g . , Asch 1951 ; Homans 1950 , 1961 ; Festinger et al . 1950 ; Sherif 1935 ) , we have depicted a social context that more nearly resembles an economic market . Indeed , a review of the assumptions that underlie our framework and that generate the scope conditions listed in table 1 suggest that ec - onomic markets are in fact particularly well suited for examining the IUS curve . Key scope conditions relate to the social - psychological orientations of the actors involved . In particular , we have presumed a single interface that commands a strong degree of identiﬁcation , particularly among middle - and upper - status actors . But actors often participate in a wide variety of role relationships , each of which produces distinct expectations that may conﬂict with the others ( e . g . , Merton 1968 ) . For example , a 7 Feltovich et al . ’s ( 1999 ) notion of “counter - signaling” is perhaps the most relevant here as it predicts an IUS relationship between an actor’s quality and his tendency to signal low quality . According to this framework , high - quality actors deliberately signal low quality so as to differentiate themselves from middling - quality actors , who cannot be as conﬁdent that they will not be viewed as low quality . In addition to this signaling model , “herding models” in the principal - agent literature share important features with the IUS conjecture . In particular , Scharfstein and Stein ( 1990 ) understand the mimicry of prevalent behavior as an effort to gain a reputation for high quality , while Zwiebel’s ( 1995 ) model predicts that actors of high and low quality are most likely to undertake a new line of activity . While space constraints prevent a full consideration of these models , it is important to recognize the main way they differ from the sociological tradition of the IUS curve : the emphasis on ability or quality in the former and status in the latter . In particular , none of these models shares with the current framework the interpretation of nonconformity among the lowest ranked as a symptom of struc - tural blockage . Indeed , note a related theme in empirical research on herding , the idea that , because they are more secure in their jobs , actors with greater seniority take more unconventional actions than do their juniors ( Chevalier and Ellison 1999 ; Hong , Kubik , and Solomon 2000 ; see also Lamont 1995 ) . If one considers tenure as a proxy for status , these ﬁndings dovetail with the idea that high - status actors enjoy greater freedom to defy audience expectations . Unfortunately , these results are not interpreted in such a fashion . To the extent that an explanation is ventured , it involves assuming that au - dience members believe that seniors are supposed to deviate more than juniors ( Avery and Chevalier 1999 ) , an interpretation that we ﬁnd tautological . In addition , an im - portant consequence of the focus on tenure as attribute rather than as an indicator of structural position is that there is no basis for expecting the curvilinearity emphasized here : one cannot be an outsider to the tenure distribution in the same way that one can be excluded from a status hierarchy . American Journal of Sociology 388 TABLE 1 Scope Conditions on the IUS Conjecture Type of Condition Scope Condition Rationale Social psychological . . . Greater identiﬁcation with the interface among middle - and high - vs . low - status actors Prerequisite for conformity to provide less value to low - status actors Greater security in role incum - bency among high - vs . low - status actors Prequisite for conformity to provides less value to high - status actors Structural . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Signiﬁcant stability in status order Prerequisite for felt security of high - status actors Presence of neighboring interfaces Prerequisite for visibility of low - status actors’ deviance Some ( downward ) mobility at middle range of status Prerequisite for middle - status actors to perceive conform - ity to be valuable Commission of action must carry threat of delegitimation Prerequisite for middle - status actor to perceive conformity to be valuable Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Threat of delegitimation must not be so great that it also discredits high - status actors Prerequisite for high - status actors to see less value in conformity middle - status candidate may not conform to a particular audience’s ex - pectations if she is oriented toward a different audience—perhaps one where she has achieved greater success ( compare Matsueda et al . 1992 ) . 8 The issue of multiple role commitments is less problematic in a market setting because market participants are typically fully committed to com - peting in the market in question . In formulating its strategy , a ﬁrm may choose among a number of different market segments , but as a creation of the market and its characteristic role relationships , it tends not to have any ancillary commitments . Relatedly , while in certain cases it may be doubtful whether an actor seeks higher status , this assumption is un - problematic when applied to sellers , in that high - status sellers generally earn greater proﬁts ( Podolny 1993 ) . We have also made assumptions about the social - psychological dis - positions characteristic of low - and high - status actors , which parallel as - sumptions about their structural positions . In particular , we have pre - sumed that ( a ) the status structure in question is sufﬁciently stable such that it confers security on high - status players and frees them to deviate and that ( b ) the lowest status actors are relatively permanent outsiders , such that they cease to identify with the interface . The ﬁrst condition is 8 Certain actors may not be candidates for any interface in that they are insensitive to others’ evaluations of them ( Wrong 1961 ) . Such actors feel no pressure to conform . Middle - Status Conformity 389 a feature of many social settings , though it needs veriﬁcation in any em - pirical application . 9 The second is more likely to be met in a setting that contains interfaces that neighbor on the focal one . Unless alternative au - diences are available , low - status outsiders have little choice but to re - double their efforts to signal membership through greater conformity . Furthermore , while a failure to gain recognition in the eyes of an audience should cause a candidate to withdraw and seek other audiences ( Stinch - combe 1964 ; Frank 1985 ) , this deviance will not be visible unless the other interface is sufﬁciently proximate to the focal one . Indeed , unless the lowest ranked candidates are observable outsiders —that is , ignored by the audience but visible to scholars because of their participation in a neighboring interface—a simple negative relationship between status and conformity should be observed . 10 Finding neighboring interfaces may of - ten be quite difﬁcult but is perhaps easiest in markets that comprise a set of tiered market segments , especially when such tiers are ordered by status . As we illustrate below in the case of the legal services and in - vestment banking industries , the members of the lower status tier are generally observable outsiders to the upper tier . Thus , the scope conditions on the social - psychological orientations of the actors—that there be lower identiﬁcation with the interface among low - status candidates and that high - status players feel secure—depend on certain features of the status structure—that it be relatively stable and contain neighboring segments . We believe that such conditions are more likely to be met in economic markets . An additional structural condition also merits attention . In particular , while the status structure must be highly stable for the IUS relationship to emerge , it cannot be so stable that there is no mobility , especially in a downward direction . If downward mobility were not an expected consequence of nonconformity , there would be little reason for middle - status candidates to conform . Finally , perhaps the most challenging issue in empirically validating the IUS conjecture concerns the nature of the action in question . As 9 A sense of security may depend on factors other than structural stability . For example , an actor may not feel secure enough to defy convention if the achievement of high status is recent ( Berkowitz and Macaulay 1961 ) . 10 It is interesting to consider in this light an apparent empirical anomaly for the IUS conjecture ( Cancian 1967 , 1979 ) , Dittes and Kelley’s ( 1956 , p . 106 ) ﬁnding that , while the very lowest ranked actors evince little private conformity and participate little in the group , they display the most conformity when they do participate . This public conformity represents an outgrowth of the artiﬁcial nature of such experimentswhereby rejected members are prevented from seeking a more favorable social reception else - where . Forced to stay in the group , these actors essentially dissemble ( Festinger 1953 ) . Indeed , such coercion forms the basis for Kuran’s ( 1995 ) theory that rapid social change occurs when actors suffering from domination suddenly obtain a receptive audience for their true preferences . American Journal of Sociology 390 discussed above , pressure for conformity pertains to an action that the audience generally uses to ascertain who is a player . That is , a scope condition pertaining to the action in question is that there must be a signiﬁcant threat that the beneﬁts of undertaking it will be outweighed by its capacity to signal that the actor is illegitimate . 11 At the same time , it must not be the case that the action is so discrediting that it will tarnish even a secure , high - status player . But how might one know a priori that an action meets these criteria ? Furthermore , how are we to regard actions that have multiple , possibly conﬂicting , meanings in the eyes of relevant audience members ? These issues clearly restrict the range of contexts to which the IUS conjecture may be applied . It is incumbent on the re - searcher to demonstrate that the action in question threatens middle - status candidates with illegitimacy and that this reaction is widely shared by relevant audience members . That is , any analysis of the IUS conjecture requires something approaching an insider’s knowledge of the empirical context . OVERVIEW OF EMPIRICAL STUDIES The foregoing theoretical clariﬁcations and scope conditions guide our attempt empirically to validate the IUS conjecture in two distinct settings : the Silicon Valley legal market and the market for investment advice . Three features of these settings make them appealing . First , they allow for the separation , either by design or through statistical controls , of the effects of status from those produced by other stratifying variables . Sec - ond , we ﬁnd in both markets highly stable—though not ﬁxed—status hierarchies that give security to the highest ranking actors and render the lowest status actors observable outsiders . Third , the action that we analyze in each context poses a considerable threat of delegitimation . Finally , it is also notable that we perform two separate studies . We believe that , given the difﬁculty in translating the IUS conjecture into a given empirical context , multiple demonstrations of the pattern serve to assuage any doubts that might pertain to a single analysis . In the following , we report on our analysis of each setting in parallel discussions . First , we provide background on each context . Next , we describe the action under study and justify the IUS hypothesis . Third , we discuss the data collection and the variables we use and follow this discussion with the models and our results . After presenting the methods 11 Implicitly , the action must also promise a beneﬁt . We do not make this an explicit scope condition because , under the assumption of purposive behavior , the only relevant actions would be those that have some advantages . Middle - Status Conformity 391 and ﬁndings for each set of models , we summarize the implications and limitations of our article . BACKGROUND FOR EMPIRICAL SETTINGS Setting 1 : Silicon Valley Law Firms The two hemispheres of the legal profession . —As a number of scholars have noted , the legal profession has evolved into two “hemispheres” or tiered market segments ( Heinz and Laumann 1982 ) . The ﬁrst consists of law that pertains to corporate clients and is most associated with ﬁrms that are large and prestigious : corporate , taxation , trusts and estates , com - mercial real estate , and securities law are frequent examples ( Heinz and Laumann 1982 ; Abel 1989 ) . The second , neighboring hemisphere focuses on individuals as clients , or “personal plight” law ( Smigel 1969 ; Heinz and Laumann 1982 ; Abel 1989 ) . This market segment typically includes criminal law , torts , house sales , personal injury , malpractice , and profes - sional liability ( Heinz and Laumann 1982 ; Abel 1989 ) . Corporate - oriented law ﬁrms earn higher revenues , pay higher wages , are more specialized , and are more prestigious . Indeed , the corporate law ﬁrm even enjoys the greatest standing in private practice ( Smigel 1969 ; Heinz and Laumann 1982 ; Abbott 1988 ; Abel 1989 ) . By contrast , law ﬁrms that focus on individual clients usually serve more clients with higher turnover . These ﬁrms spend more time conferring with clients and less time conducting research than their corporate - oriented counterparts . As Heinz and Laumann ( 1982 ) note , there is little overlap between the two hemispheres . Only 8 % of the 699 lawyers in their 1975 study of Chicago lawyers devoted more than 25 % of their time to each hemisphere . Fur - thermore , members of each hemisphere develop markedly different social networks , as evidenced by their participation in different bar associations ( Carlin 1962 ; Heinz and Laumann 1982 ) . In short , it is difﬁcult for a law ﬁrm to straddle both segments of the legal private practice world . “Image - making” and the law ﬁrm’s interfaces . —A law ﬁrm orients itself to two primary audiences : clients ( for legal services ) and law schools ( for labor ) . Clients may be further subdivided into corporations and individ - uals , as highlighted above . A ﬁrm’s proﬁle of practice areas is understood to reﬂect its ﬁelds of expertise . As such , clients select law ﬁrms in part based on the set of practice areas they offer . Similarly , a ﬁrm’s identity also has important ramiﬁcations for its ability to recruit new law school graduates . As is the case for clientele , law ﬁrms are concerned with being placed in the consideration set of top law school students . Smigel ( 1969 ) elaborates on law ﬁrms as “image - making machinery” with respect to law student recruiting , “To change , maintain , or create attractive images , and American Journal of Sociology 392 to assure or reassure the recruit , the ﬁrms send notices to the placement ofﬁces of the law schools in which they plead innocent to certain detri - mental charges and claim desirable attributes . This is part of their ‘image - making machinery’ . . . designed to bolster a desire or defeat a fear” ( p . 51 ) . The challenge for law ﬁrms is to align their announcement of identity through their afﬁliation with various areas of practice with an audience’s placement ( compare Stone 1962 ) . In general , this process suggests that law ﬁrms will enter those areas of practice that reﬂect the identity that they wish to cultivate . The Silicon Valley legal market . —The geographic region now known as Silicon Valley—Santa Clara County and southern San Mateo County—began its transformation from an agricultural to a technological economy at the end of World War II . The introduction of Department of Defense funding eventually led to the creation of many organizations , such as Hewlett Packard and SRI ( Stanford Research Institute ) . Over time , through the growth in the founding of technological ﬁrms and their spin - offs , a critical mass of technology - based ﬁrms arose , facilitating the emergence of a semiconductor industry . The steady growth in the success and prominence of these ﬁrms eventually lead to the term Silicon Valley , coined by an electronics trade publication journalist in 1971 . It is within this setting that a niche for lawyers and their ﬁrms opened and expanded . However , not every Silicon Valley law ﬁrm seeks and serves high - tech corporations . In addition to such clients , the valley’s population growth has meant an increasing supply of individual clients as well , many of whom are well educated , with relatively high incomes ( Saxenian 1981 ) . Furthermore , as the region evolved , commercial and residential real estate became increasingly scarce and valuable , opening other niches for legal services . Since Silicon Valley constitutes a new legal market , it is a particularly compelling context in which to conduct the present study . We expect that , in the emerging legal market of Silicon Valley , a law ﬁrm’s identity on either side of the corporate - “personal plight” divide may be as yet unclear and thereby sensitive to how its actions affect its placement by relevant audiences . That is , relative to more established legal markets , Silicon Valley law ﬁrms are more likely to meet the condition that the prospect of mobility be salient to middle - status actors . Indeed , since previous re - search on the practice areas of law ﬁrms has treated ﬁrms’ participation in these areas as static , we provide novel insight into the process by which the observed distribution of practices emerges . Thus , our analysis adds to the sociology of law and legal markets , as well as the more general issue of the IUS conjecture . Middle - Status Conformity 393 Setting 2 : Securities Analysts Securities analysts , who have long been studied by ﬁnancial economists and accountants , have recently come to the attention of economic soci - ologists ( e . g . , Burk 1988 ; Eccles and Crane 1987 ; Useem 1993 , 1996 ; Zuck - erman 1997 , 1999 , 2000 ; Rao and Sivakumar 1999 ; Hayward and Boeker 1998 ; Mavrinac 1999 ) . This research describes the analyst’s job in sig - niﬁcant detail ( see also Morley 1988 ) . For present purposes , we stress two features of the analyst’s position . First , in parallel with the overall bro - kerage function of the investment banks that employ them , analysts must negotiate a two - sided role set : they link the buyers and sellers of securities . Thus , like law ﬁrms , analysts orient themselves to two primary audiences . Second , analysts’ roles differ depending on the status of their bank . As shown below , the lowest status banks are effectively outside the ﬁeld of consideration of the largest issuers and investors . Consider ﬁrst the analyst at a high - status investment bank . Such an analyst’s primary clientele consists of portfolio managers and “buy - side” analysts at such large institutions as pension funds and insurance com - panies . The analyst specializes in one or two industries , rarely covering more than two dozen stocks at one point in time . Coverage largely amounts to the provision of two main products—earnings forecasts and investment recommendations—as well as periodic industry reports and more informal guidance . Since investors typically receive analyst research gratis , the analyst does not directly contribute to the bank’s proﬁts . Rather , it is hoped that investors who seek out the analyst’s guidance will then use the bank to execute his trades . The senior analyst , her staff of junior analysts , and the larger research department of the bank work with the sales and trading departments to market the bank’s services to investors . Analysts interact with their second clientele—the executives of the ﬁrms they cover—on two levels . First , just as a journalist is dependent on her sources for leads , the analyst relies on her relationships with corporate executives for information and analysis that is not widely disseminated ( Francis and Philbrick 1993 ) . Such relationships , which may be conducted in visits to corporate headquarters , telephone calls with senior executives , or in group settings , are crucial to the analyst in establishing her claim to expertise . Thus , when asked to explain the advantage enjoyed by the analyst over institutional investors , one analyst explained , “it is relation - ship - driven . Big . . . pieces of information get distributed to the people with the best relationship with the ( executives ) . ” 12 In recent years , analysts have come to interact with executives on a 12 Interview by John Wood with prominent Internet analyst , November 1998 . Quotes from interviews in this section are drawn from material that served as the basis for Siglienti et al . ( 1999 ) . Interview transcripts are available from the authors upon request . American Journal of Sociology 394 second level as well . In particular , analysts are increasingly important to their banks’ corporate ﬁnance business , which includes advice on mergers and acquisitions as well as underwriting stock and bond offerings . An - alysts , who are typically compensated for their part in such deals ( Siconolﬁ 1992 , 1995 ) , may play a variety of roles from originating business to exploiting their prominence in the market in support of a deal . For ex - ample , in agreeing to give a bank the right to underwrite its offering , there is generally a tacit understanding that the ﬁrm will receive “after market support”—that is , positive coverage from the bank’s analyst fol - lowing the deal ( Siglienti et al . 1999 ) . 13 The two hemispheres of corporate securities analysts . —Thus , the an - alyst who works for a high - status investment bank is a candidate for two different audiences : the executives of large corporations and the managers of large institutional funds . The role of the analyst at a lower status bank is quite comparable except that such analysts generally compete in less desirable interfaces . Indeed , as is the case among law ﬁrms , investment banks may be divided into two main “hemispheres” in that the high - status ﬁrms that cater primarily to large corporations and institutional investors are marked off from the low - status ﬁrms that service individual or “retail” investors and various niche clientele ( Eccles and Crane 1987 , pp . 100 – 107 ) . 14 This division on the investor side is paralleled in the bank’s relations with ﬁrms . High - status banks lead or comanage the vast majority of securities offerings and serve as advisors on virtually all mergers and acquisitions for large corporations ( see Eccles and Crane 1987 , p . 105 ) . ACTIONS TO BE EXPLAINED AND IUS CURVE HYPOTHESES Setting 1 : Silicon Valley Law Firms In illustrating the IUS curve in the case of Silicon Valley law ﬁrms , we investigate the rate at which ﬁrms adopt a family law practice . Family law is a compelling choice for our study because , while it has traditionally been considered part of the “personal plight” hemisphere , it necessarily involves individual clients in the privileged strata of society who require help with cases of divorce , adoption , and child custody ( Heinz and Lau - mann 1982 ; Abel 1989 ) . Thus , while it generally signals that the law ﬁrm 13 As one executive commented , “almost all the negotiation [ about which investment bank to lead its initial public offering ] these days is based upon whose [ analyst ] coverage they can guarantee and what kind of aftermarket support can they give to the stock . ” Interview by Tracy Tefertiller with executive at Internet division of Fortune 500 com - pany , October 1998 . 14 Several high - status ﬁrms , such as Merrill Lynch , have strong retail as well as insti - tutional sales arms . Middle - Status Conformity 395 is not a player for corporate clients and elite law school graduates , al - ternative interpretations are available depending upon the ﬁrm’s status . Speciﬁcally , whether family law affects status mobility is a function of whether the ﬁrm is identiﬁed as a high - status , low - status , or middle - status law ﬁrm . When a high - status law ﬁrm begins practicing family law , the audience for legal services tends to interpret this action as a response to the demand of corporate executives who require services under the domain of family law . Alternatively , high - status ﬁrms will announce a family law practice but clarify that it is relevant only to the extent that it affects the business interests of their corporate clients ( such as the relationship between bank - ruptcy and divorce ) . 15 That is , they justify their involvement in family law through the use of disclaimers ( Hewitt and Stokes 1975 ) . As Smigel ( 1969 ) notes in his study of Wall Street lawyers , “The large [ New York ] law ﬁrms . . . discourage , either overtly or through their public image , the work of the individual ( unless he is wealthy or connected with a corporate client ) ” ( p . 150 ) . Announcing a family law practice thus allows a high - status law ﬁrm to indicate that it will handle the needs of the executive in addition to the needs of the company that the executive represents . The addition of a family practice may be attractive to a subset of high - status law ﬁrms , which view it as a way of differentiating them - selves from their competitors . By contrast , the audiences for the corporate hemisphere do not place personal plight law ﬁrms in their consideration sets . Such ﬁrms are often thought of as being at the “margin of their profession” ( Smigel 1969 ) . When a low - status law ﬁrm announces a specialty in family law , the audience is more likely to interpret this action as a means of increasing revenue by offering more services to its ( stereotypically lower class ) cli - entele . While such an announcement harms such a ﬁrm’s ability to move into the corporate hemisphere , such a penalty is redundant : as outsiders , such ﬁrms are structurally prevented from upward mobility regardless of their actions . It is the set of ﬁrms that straddle the high - and low - status hemispheres for which claiming an expertise in family law creates a dilemma . Finan - cially , returns from practicing family law are a function of demand and the income ( or assets ) of individuals seeking such services . In Silicon Valley , the increase in both the region’s population and average income 15 For example , a high - status ﬁrm may claim to focus on the aspects of family law that affect family - owned businesses . American Journal of Sociology 396 suggests an increasing demand for family law . 16 Furthermore , adding an additional area of legal practice is likely to increase a law ﬁrm’s economies of scope to the extent that the new practice area complements the ﬁrm’s present set of practice areas . Nevertheless , the quandary for a middle - status law ﬁrm is that it risks losing legitimacy when making an an - nouncement of family law practice . As we have argued , a high - status candidate is more likely to engage in differentiation to the extent that she feels secure in her role incumbency . At the same time , the actions that low - status actors pursue do not affect their position in the status hierarchy ; they are resigned to the neighboring interface of the personal plight hemisphere . However , for the middle - status law ﬁrm that seeks recognition in the corporate hemisphere , its proﬁle of practice areas is critical . The audiences of corporate clients and elite law schools will be more likely to doubt a middle - status ﬁrm’s mem - bership in their consideration set if its proﬁle of practice areas includes family law . That is , middle - status ﬁrms appeal to corporate clients and elite law schools to the extent that they appear as pure corporate law ﬁrms . The announcement of a family law practice involves the signiﬁcant risk that corporate clients and elite law schools will screen the middle - status ﬁrm out of consideration . Moreover , if delegitimation occurs , it is likely to be costly and ﬁnal . According to Abel ( 1989 ) , ﬁrms that reside in one hemisphere of the legal profession have virtually no means of crossing over to the other . In sum , Hypothesis 1 . — Ceteris paribus , there exists a U - shaped relationship between law ﬁrm status and the announcement of family law practice . Setting 2 : Securities Analysts In demonstrating the IUS curve in our study of securities analysts , we analyze their differential tendency to issue “sell” recommendations . As discussed above , corporate ﬁnance deals typically involve a pledge of after - market support for the issuing ﬁrm by the bank’s analyst . Conversely , analysts often suffer retribution when they express negative views on a stock . Recent surveys of executives and the analysts who cover their ﬁrms indicate that , in reaction to a sell recommendation , 42 % of the ﬁrms would eliminate the analyst’s bank from its corporate ﬁnance deals and 34 % would reduce his access to information . That such threats are heeded is 16 Our examination of U . S . Census data reveals that since 1946 , the population of Santa Clara County increased by an average of approximately 28 , 000 each year . In 1993 , the population was 1 , 591 , 900 . During 1997 , the Santa Clara County unemployment rate was 3 . 1 % , the lowest in the United States ( where the average was 4 . 9 % ) . Fur - thermore , the 1996 per capita income for the San Francisco Bay Area was $ 32 , 933 compared to $ 25 , 820 nationally ( Hoffman 1997 ; U . S . Department of Commerce data ) . Middle - Status Conformity 397 indicated by the fact that 73 % and 89 % of the analysts anticipated each of these reprisals respectively ( Reuters 1999 b , pp . 66 – 67 ; Reuters 1999 a , pp . 26 – 27 ) . The CFO of a major Internet company described his reaction to sell recommendations in the following manner : “we’ll say , we’re not going to provide you information for a little while , and at some point you can come talk to us and we’ll see if we’re . . . on the same wavelength . ” 17 Such pressure to refrain from expressing negative sentiment is often re - inforced by corporate ﬁnance departments , which are loath to anger de - sirable clients ( Siconolﬁ 1992 ; Browning 1995 ) . Thus , to the extent that the analyst needs to maintain a good relationship with executives , she cannot freely express negative sentiment . Furthermore , it is important to recognize that institutional investors , who would presumably prefer that analysts feel unconstrained in their recommendations , do not necessarily want analysts to issue sell ratings . It appears paradoxical that institutional investors typically give high rat - ings to the very same analysts who are most involved in corporate ﬁnance deals , despite their seeming conﬂict of interest ( e . g . , Reuters 1999 a , 1999 b ) . This paradox dissolves when we recognize that an analyst’s involvement in corporate ﬁnance activity—and the positive recommendations that ac - company it—are often interpreted as a sign that he has the deep rela - tionships that afford access to critical information ( Institutional Investor 1999 , p . 120 ) . By contrast , the publication of a sell rating sends the opposite signal . To the extent that the possession of strong relationships with ex - ecutives deﬁnes what it is to be an analyst , the sell recommendation constitutes prima facie evidence that one does not merit this designation . Indeed , if an analyst wishes to convey negative sentiment , she may down - grade her “buy” recommendation to a “hold , ” which though seemingly advising investors to retain their existing shares in the stock , is widely understood as a euphemism for “sell” ( e . g . , Lin and McNichols 1998 ) . 18 Thus , given the penalty incurred from the issuance of a negative rating and the availability of less provocative alternatives , there seems little reason for an analyst to publish such a rating . Accordingly , the sell rec - ommendation is vanishingly rare ( Dugar and Nathan 1995 ; Hayward and Boeker 1998 ; Lin and McNichols 1998 ; see below ) . But the sell rating is not avoided completely . In light of the pressure from both of the analyst’s audiences , why do we ever see a sell recom - 17 Interview by John Wenstrup , November 1998 . 18 Many observers speculate that the issuance of SEC Regulation FD ( “full disclosure” ) in September 2000 will signiﬁcantly reduce the extent to which institutional investors value analysts for their access to management . A possible consequence may be in - creased pressure on analysts to express negative opinion . American Journal of Sociology 398 mendation ? 19 The principal answer is that the beneﬁts of issuing a dis - senting , negative opinion are potentially great . Where all analysts speak with one voice , any analyst who offers a different view and is subsequently vindicated is more likely to be recognized for her wisdom . Accordingly , stories circulate on Wall Street regarding analysts who earned their rep - utations from “courageously” issuing a prescient sell recommendation when their peers all expressed positive opinions ( see Tannenbaum and Berton 1987 ; Laderman 1998 ) . Thus , in common with the law ﬁrms’ adoption of a family practice , the issuing of a sell recommendation both carries clear risks of delegitimation as well as a countervailing prospect of signiﬁcant beneﬁt . Further , the highest and lowest status analysts should be most likely to dissent from the prevailing , positive view . The highest status analysts , who rarely lose signiﬁcant status from year to year ( see below ) , should be less concerned about being eliminated as players in the competition for both executives and institutional investors . One executive reported that “We . . . spend more time on speciﬁc analysts than others . . . based on . . . which ones are movers and shakers within the industry and honestly which ones we just have better relationships with , which often means which ones have strong buys out on us . ” 20 That is , negative sentiment elicits retribution , but the high - status analyst enjoys a degree of immunity to such pressure . As argued above , an actor’s status may override the potentially damaging message implied by her actions . Accordingly , Hay - ward and Boeker ( 1998 ) show that , among the analysts of the banks involved in ﬁnancings , higher status analysts are more likely to express negative sentiment . 21 Thus , the security that comes from high status gives an analyst the freedom to dissent . In addition , to the extent that a candidate is barred from mobility into the high - status interface , we assume that she will cease to identify with that role and respond to a different set of expectations . In particular , as seen below , the majority of analysts are effectively ex - cluded from competing for the largest institutional investors . Rather , such analysts tend to be oriented to smaller institutions and individual investors who are less likely to view the sell recommendation as illegitimate . Indeed , 19 At least two other factors reinforce the skewed distribution of ratings . First , to the extent that investment banks earn greater commissions on purchases than sales , they have an incentive not to express negative sentiment ( Darlin 1983 ) . Second , since many institutional investors take large , illiquid positions in the stocks they own , they often prefer that analysts “talk up” the stocks in their portfolio rather than provoke a sell - off ( Siconolﬁ 1995 ) . 20 Interview with director of ﬁnance of an Internet company , November 1998 . 21 Stickel ( 1990 ) also showed a slight tendency for high - ranking analysts to deviate from the mean earnings forecast . Middle - Status Conformity 399 to the extent that the avoidance of a sell recommendation through the use of euphemisms and the cessation of coverage represents an inside game played by a closed circle of large corporations and institutions , investors who are outside that circle may reward the analyst who shows herself to be an outsider as well . Clearly , the low - status analyst is unlikely to win friends among executives by issuing a sell rating . However , he is much less likely to have those relationships in the ﬁrst place . Thus , just as low - status law ﬁrms have little to lose from announcing a family law practice , low - status analysts suffer relatively little from the publication of a sell rating . 22 While both high - and low - status analysts face a trade - off when con - fronting the decision to issue a sell rating , this dilemma is more acute for the middle - status analyst . Such an analyst is oriented toward the inter - locking interfaces deﬁned by large institutions and corporations but oc - cupies the periphery of this interface and thus cannot be as conﬁdent as the high - ranking analyst that he will retain his standing as a player after publishing a sell recommendation . The middle - status analyst must work both to cultivate his ties with corporate executives and to signal to in - stitutional investors that he possesses such relationships . As such , the analyst of middle rank should be particularly loath to issue a sell rating . Accordingly , Hypothesis 2 . — Ceteris paribus , there exists a U - shaped relationship between analyst rank and her tendency to issue negative ratings . DATA SOURCES AND VARIABLES IN ANALYSIS Setting 1 : Silicon Valley Law Firms Data sources . —In setting 1 , we model the rate at which Silicon Valley law ﬁrms adopted family law over the period 1946 – 96 . The data for this analysis were collected from the 1945 – 96 editions of the Martindale - Hubbell Law Directories for law ﬁrms in Silicon Valley , California ( Mar - tindale - Hubbell 1945 – 96 ) . We test our hypothesis on all law ﬁrms in Silicon Valley , a relatively self - contained market for legal services ( Such - man 1993 ) . For the purposes of this study , Silicon Valley comprises the following 10 cities : Redwood City , Menlo Park , Palo Alto , Los Altos , 22 A difference between the two contexts is that , to the extent that they are accurate in their sell ratings , a low - status analyst could potentially gain greater credibility and , hence , rise in the status structure . By contrast , even a highly successful family law practice is unlikely to be the basis for upward mobility through the legal status struc - ture . At the same time , this difference is largely theoretical because it is unlikely that an analyst can be consistently correct with her sell recommendations . Analysts who are negative are penalized severely when they are wrong ( e . g . , Mclean 2000 ) . American Journal of Sociology 400 Mountain View , Sunnyvale , Santa Clara , Cupertino , Campbell , and San Jose . In 1996 , Silicon Valley hosted 209 law ofﬁces and partnerships and 2 , 375 active attorneys . 23 The directories list law ﬁrm characteristics , in - cluding up to 73 areas of law practice specialization . Family law is one of the 73 areas of practice . When followed across time , the directories provide time - varying data for model estimation , including information on which year a ﬁrm ﬁrst announced that it was practicing family law . This collection generated data on 516 law partnerships across the 50 - year ob - servation period . Dependent variable . —The year in which a ﬁrm ﬁrst indicates that it practices family law is coded as a “1” ; the variable is coded as “0” until such an announcement is made . Firms that announce a family practice in a given year are dropped from the analysis in subsequent years . Given our emphasis on the ﬁrm’s identity and position within a status hierarchy , a public declaration of family law ( such as the legal directory listing ) naturally conforms to our theoretical framework . Of the 516 ﬁrms , 130 ( 25 . 2 % ) indicated a family law practice during the period under study . Measurement of status . —Firm status is operationalized as the propor - tion of the ﬁrm’s attorneys that have degrees from six of the elite law schools ( Yale , Harvard , Columbia , New York , Stanford , and Chicago ) . 24 This measure is consistent with past measures of status used by Smigel ( 1969 ) and Heinz and Laumann ( 1982 ) . In addition , this measure con - ceptually matches the concept of market status introduced by Podolny ( 1993 ) , in which high status is derived from afﬁliations with other high - status actors . In our case , elite law school alumni confer status on law ﬁrms by accepting positions within the ﬁrms . As noted in Phillips ( 2001 ) , the law schools were selected by examining the legal afﬁliations of national and regional institutions ( political and economic ) across the observation period . The methods used to acquire this information were varied . For example , we recorded the afﬁliations of individuals in Who’s Who entries , National Law Journal lists of prominent attorneys , local politicians , judges , and so on . The greater the proportion of attorneys from the six law schools , the greater the ﬁrm’s status . 25 23 This study includes only law partnerships . That is , only ﬁrms with at least two attorneys included in the population . Since 96 % of the 2 , 375 active attorneys in the directory are in partnerships , we feel that any biases from excluding solo practitioners are minimal . 24 In a preliminary subset analysis of Palo Alto , California , law ﬁrms , we also included the University of Virginia , University of Michigan , University of California at Berkeley , and Georgetown . However , we found no differences in the results . 25 In a preliminary analysis of Palo Alto law ﬁrms ( the location of the majority of attorneys in Silicon Valley ) , we coded alternative status measures such as the number of partners that were part - time faculty at law schools ; the number of partners that Middle - Status Conformity 401 Figure 2 depicts the hierarchy among the 209 Silicon Valley law ﬁrms in 1996 . The Lorenz curves depict the extent of inequality in the distri - bution of size and status of Silicon Valley law ﬁrms . The distribution of elite lawyers reveals a sharp inequality in status ( Gini p . 851 ) , which is not reducible to differences in ﬁrm size ( Gini p . 620 ) . Indeed , the notion of the observable outsider seems quite meaningful here in that more than 75 % of the law ﬁrms employ no elite law school graduates at all . Moreover , rank in this status hierarchy is quite stable at the top , though with some ﬂuidity in the center . During the 50 - year observation period , 43 of the 516 ﬁrms dropped from more than zero to no elite law school graduates . However , 28 of these ﬁrms never had more than one attorney from an elite law school at any point in its life cycle . Similarly , only one of the ﬁrms that dropped to zero elite attorneys had more than ﬁve attorneys at any point in its life cycle . Thus , the necessary structural conditions for observing the IUS curve appear to be present . Control variables . —We control for the following variables in our anal - ysis of the adoption of family practice : the areas of practice in which a ﬁrm is currently involved , the overall scope of its practice areas , a ﬁrm’s age , its size , its rates of partner growth and turnover , whether the ﬁrm is a branch ofﬁce , and whether it is located in the north end of Silicon Valley . We also control for two population - level factors : the number of previous announcements and the size ( density ) of the law ﬁrm population . We also include several period effects . Table 2 presents summary statistics and a correlation matrix for the independent variables . Areas of practice . —One of the advantages of the law ﬁrm context as a site for testing the IUS conjecture is that the relationship between status and conformity is unlikely to be confounded with other stratifying var - iables such as expertise , access to information , or differential resource endowments . Indeed , the start - up cost of initiating a family law practice is relatively low when compared to other areas of law such as patent or bankruptcy law . Further , the prerequisite knowledge to open a practice in family law , which is a standard second - or third - year course in law school , is quite abundant . Nevertheless , to avoid the difﬁculties in inter - pretation that have plagued past tests of the IUS conjecture , we must control for various attributes that might be correlated both with status and the tendency to announce a family law practice . In particular , we expect that a ﬁrm’s existing practice areas condition were appointed to judges ; the number of partners that were ofﬁcers in the California state and American Bars ; and legal Lexis - Nexis magazine counts of law ﬁrm names . Each alternative measure was highly correlated with the law school measure . A con - siderable advantage of the law school measure of status is that it is the only measure we found to be observable over the 50 - year period , where other measures were ob - servable over only 20 years or less . American Journal of Sociology 402 Fig . 2 . —Lorenz curve for the number and status of attorneys , by ﬁrm in 1996 . Variable p all attorneys or all high - status attorneys . Broken line represents the cumulative number of attorneys ( Gini p . 620 ) ; solid line represents cumulative status score ( Gini p . 861 ) . N p 204 law ﬁrms . its tendency to enter family law . For example , a personal injury law ﬁrm is more likely to have access to the relevant clientele , have the internal structure necessary for managing multiple clients and high turnover , and have lawyers that received training in family law . At the same time , family law is often thought to complement bankruptcy law and estate planning but is inconsistent with securities law . Thus , we include 18 dummy var - iables for major practice areas . 26 However , note that the addition of these dummy variables renders our test of ﬁrm status more conservative . Our framework entails that relevant audiences evaluate a ﬁrm’s status through reference to the types of law it practices . As such , the effects of the practice area dummies could themselves be interpreted as status effects . 26 In total , ﬁrms distinguished themselves across 73 practice areas . We arrived at the 18 major areas by collapsing many areas ( including ERISA as a part of labor and employment law ) and including only those areas of law that were practiced by more than 5 % of the population . Thus , practice areas such as aviation or railroad were not included among the 18 major practice areas for which we controlled . TABLE 2 Summary Statistics and Correlation Matrix for Law Firms and Family Law Announcement Variables Mean SD Min Max 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 . ln ( density ) . . . . . . . . . . . 4 . 72 . 73 1 . 79 5 . 34 . . . 2 . ln ( partners ) . . . . . . . . . . 1 . 31 . 77 0 4 . 47 . 12 3 . ln ( associates ) . . . . . . . . . 95 . 99 0 5 . 33 . 17 . 48 4 . Firm age . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 . 54 9 . 74 0 50 . 02 . 40 . 20 5 . Previousannouncements . . . 74 . 15 48 . 12 0 130 . 86 . 11 . 19 . 01 6 . Relative scope . . . . . . . 15 . 10 . 01 . 63 (cid:1) . 65 . 21 . 16 . 02 (cid:1) . 50 7 . Proportiongrowth . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 . 31 0 4 . 33 . 04 . 17 . 06 . 02 . 03 . 00 8 . Proportionattrition . . . . . . . . . . . . 06 . 17 0 1 . 00 . 06 (cid:1) . 01 . 03 . 09 . 05 (cid:1) . 01 . 33 9 . North end of Silicon Valley . . . . . . 33 . 47 0 1 . 00 . 07 . 06 . 01 (cid:1) . 09 . 06 . 02 . 04 . 00 10 . Firm status . . . . . . . . . 24 . 27 0 1 . 00 (cid:1) . 40 . 08 (cid:1) . 07 . 02 (cid:1) . 39 . 37 (cid:1) . 01 . 00 . 35 11 . Pre - 1977 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 . 50 0 1 . 00 (cid:1) . 60 . 18 . 02 . 50 (cid:1) . 69 . 26 (cid:1) . 03 . 01 (cid:1) . 09 . 31 12 . Period : 1977 – 81 . . . . 11 . 31 0 1 . 00 . 13 (cid:1) . 01 (cid:1) . 05 (cid:1) . 13 . 04 (cid:1) . 11 . 03 (cid:1) . 00 . 04 (cid:1) . 09 (cid:1) . 34 13 . Period : 1982 – 87 . . . . 19 . 39 0 1 . 00 . 27 . 00 . 10 (cid:1) . 17 . 29 (cid:1) . 07 . 03 (cid:1) . 01 . 04 (cid:1) . 08 (cid:1) . 47 (cid:1) . 17 14 . Period : 1988 – 96 . . . . 22 . 41 0 1 . 00 . 37 (cid:1) . 21 (cid:1) . 08 (cid:1) . 35 . 52 (cid:1) . 29 (cid:1) . 01 (cid:1) . 00 . 04 (cid:1) . 23 (cid:1) . 51 (cid:1) . 18 (cid:1) . 25 15 . San Francisco branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 . 34 0 1 . 00 . 19 . 18 . 33 (cid:1) . 12 . 23 . 11 . 08 . 03 . 00 (cid:1) . 05 (cid:1) . 29 . 15 . 16 . 14 . . . 16 . Non – San Francisco branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 . 35 0 1 . 00 . 09 . 24 . 23 . 08 . 08 . 00 . 05 . 05 . 03 (cid:1) . 08 . 01 (cid:1) . 01 (cid:1) . 02 . 05 (cid:1) . 17 Note . — Summary statistics for the 18 areas of law are available upon request . N p 3 , 341 . American Journal of Sociology 404 Firm scope . —It is likely that generalists are inclined to begin practicing family law since the cost of adding another area of law diminishes as the number of areas the law ﬁrm already practices increases . Moreover , there are potential gains to adding an area that complements a ﬁrm’s present set of practice areas . As a measure of scope , we compute the number of law practice areas that a law ﬁrm reports in the directory in a particular year , divided by the total number of practice areas that are reported across all Silicon Valley ﬁrms in that year . Firm age and size . —Each ﬁrm’s age is recorded as the number of years since the volume in which the ﬁrm ﬁrst appeared in the directory . Firm size is operationalized in two ways : ( 1 ) the total number of full - time part - ners and ( 2 ) the total number of full - time associates . Given that the dis - tribution of ﬁrm sizes is log normal ( skewed to reﬂect a few relatively large ﬁrms ) , the log of each size variable is coded . 27 To check whether our measure for status is an artifact of ﬁrm size ( e . g . , small and large ﬁrms are more likely to announce family law than midsize ﬁrms ) , we also test for a curvilinear effect of ﬁrm size . As with the practice area dummy variables , however , the inclusion of the size variables likely renders our test for an IUS relationship more conservative since ﬁrm size is often seen as an indicator of status by the legal press . Growth and partner turnover . —The proportional growth and attrition of the number of partners is coded to capture ﬁnancial health . These indicators are consistent with Phillips’s ( 2001 ) ﬁnding that partnership growth lowers a law ﬁrm’s likelihood of mortality , while attrition increases the likelihood of mortality . Branch ofﬁce . —Two dummy variables are coded for whether the ﬁrm is a branch ofﬁce . The ﬁrst variable equals “1” if the ﬁrm is a branch ofﬁce of a San Francisco – based ﬁrm . The second variable equals “1” if the ﬁrm is a branch ofﬁce of any other city besides San Francisco ( e . g . , New York , Los Angeles , etc ) . This distinction allows us to estimate any differences in the motivation behind establishing a branch ofﬁce in Silicon Valley . For example , a San Francisco – based ﬁrm is more likely to open a branch ofﬁce in Silicon Valley to take advantage of the primary sources of revenue within Silicon Valley : securities , intellectual property , and cor - porate law . North end of Silicon Valley . —Silicon Valley can be roughly distin - guished geographically by whether the law ﬁrm is located in the north or south end of Silicon Valley . The north end is represented by the cities most associated with Silicon Valley by the popular press : Palo Alto , Menlo Park , and Redwood City . These cities host Stanford University and many 27 We have also run models with size unlogged , with no change in the variables of interest but less model ﬁt . Middle - Status Conformity 405 of Silicon Valley’s successful venture capitalists . To capture this effect on the rate of family law announcement , we coded a “1” for whether the law ﬁrm is located in any one of the three cities . As is the case for a ﬁrm’s size and its proﬁle of practice areas , the association between the northern end of Silicon Valley and higher status actors makes our test of the effect of status more conservative . Population density . —Population density is calculated as the log of the total number of law ﬁrms in Silicon Valley for a given year . This measure serves as a proxy for diffuse competition over resources ( Hannan and Freeman 1989 ) . Number of previous family law announcements . —This operationaliza - tion is the total number of ﬁrms that have announced family law practice in the year prior to the observation year . Period effects . —To ensure that the effects of the independent variables are not inﬂuenced by the era in which the event occurred , four dummy variables are coded to capture activity before 1976 , between 1977 and 1981 , between 1982 and 1986 , and between 1987 and 1996 . These periods represent the periods in which family law was announced . The ﬁrst quar - tile of announcements occurred before 1977 , the year before the California Bar organized a Family Law Section . The second quartile of ad an - nouncements options occurred between 1977 and 1981 . The third quartile occurred between 1982 and 1986 . The ﬁnal quartile of announcements occurred after 1987 . Setting 2 : Securities Analysts Data sources . —We use two data sources for our second analysis , which examines the likelihood that an analyst had at least one sell rating on the stocks she covered at the end of 1996 . Data on forecasts and recommen - dations come from Research Holdings , formerly known as Standard & Poor’s Forecaster . Like other databases , such as IBES ( see , e . g . , Haun - schild 1994 ) and Zacks ( e . g . , Zuckerman 1999 ) , Research Holdings pro - vides detailed records on earnings forecasts , including the identity of the analyst and the ﬁrm for which the earnings - per - share ( EPS ) forecast is made and the date it was published . In addition , while accounting con - ventions allow for a variety of ways for calculating EPS , Research Hold - ings calculates the actual and forecasted EPS according to the same for - mula , which allows for the assessment of forecast accuracy . Research Holdings also includes information on analyst recommendations . In line with general practice , recommendations are coded in ﬁve catego - ries—which roughly correspond to the prevalent ratings of “strong buy , ” “buy , ” “hold , ” “sell , ” and “strong sell . ” McNichols and O’Brien ( 1997 ; see also Lin and McNichols 1998 ) discuss the Research Holdings database in American Journal of Sociology 406 further detail and describe its utility for the accounting literature , where such data are subject to extensive analysis . Data on analyst rankings were provided by Institutional Investor mag - azine . Since 1972 , Institutional Investor has published the annual “All - American Research Team , ” which ranks analysts by industry and non - industry categories according to a survey of the largest institutional investors . This poll and several others , as well as an objective evaluation of forecasts and recommendations by the Wall Street Journal , shape the competitive landscape for analysts . As noted above , achieving a high rank indicates an analyst’s success in guiding institutional investors but also helps an analyst’s bank attract investment banking clients ( Siglienti et al . , 1999 ) . Moreover , success in the Institutional Investor survey allows an analyst to command a higher salary ( Eccles and Crane 1987 , pp . 152 – 53 ) . The present study uses data from the 1996 survey . The survey universe comprised the largest institutional investors—for example , banks , insur - ance companies , pension funds , and mutual funds , a list that includes the members of the Institutional Investor 300 , as well as additional signiﬁcant institutions derived from industry sources . Questionnaires were mailed out in April for return in June . Respondent institutions were encouraged to divide responsibility for completing the survey among those individuals who could best represent the institution’s views regarding the analysts in a particular industry or category . In 1996 , 1 , 337 individuals responded for 300 ﬁrms . 68 % of the Institutional Investor 300 and more than 90 % 28 of the Institutional Investor 100 were respondents . Dependent variable . —We present results on the last recommendations an analyst made from July 1 to the end of calendar year 1996 , though virtually the same patterns emerge regardless of the time period chosen . Table 3 shows the distribution of sell ratings in three forms : across all recommendations , by ﬁrm , and by analyst . We see that fewer than 5 % of all recommendations explicitly advised investors to sell shares . More - over , over 85 % of analysts voiced only positive or neutral opinion , and only 10 % of ﬁrms were tainted by even one negative rating . As appears evident , the publication of a sell rating departs radically from standard analyst behavior . Measurement of Status The question on the Institutional Investor survey that elicits an analyst’s status is the following : “We are putting together our ‘team’ of outstanding 28 Institutional Investor does not reveal the exact response rate for categories that exceed 90 % , lest the identity of respondents be deducible . Middle - Status Conformity 407 TABLE 3 The Rarity of a “Sell” Recommendation , Final Rating of 1996 Recommendation Frequency % Distribution of recommendations , 20 , 765 analyst - ﬁrm pairs : “Strong Buy” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 , 261 35 . 0 “Buy” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 , 666 27 . 3 “Hold” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 , 915 33 . 3 “Sell” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 560 2 . 7 “Strong Sell” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 363 1 . 7 Percentage of “sell” or “strong sell” recommendations , by analyst ( 2 , 768 analysts ) : 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 , 393 86 . 45 ! 10 % . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66 2 . 39 10 % – 20 % . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117 4 . 22 20 % – 30 % . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94 3 . 40 30 % – 100 % . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98 3 . 54 Percentage of “sell” or “strong sell” recommendations , by ﬁrm ( 5 , 127 ﬁrms ) : 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 , 574 89 . 21 ! 25 % . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234 4 . 57 25 % – 50 % . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129 2 . 51 50 % – 100 % . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 190 3 . 71 brokerage analysts for 1996 and would like your help . Please rank in order your selections for the best analysts in each of the following cate - gories during the past twelve months . ” Respondents are given places for up to four analysts and their relative rank . Institutional Investor calcu - lates an analyst’s overall score by summing the number of times an analyst is listed , weighted by the rank he is assigned and the asset size of the institution . Ranks 1 – 4 and asset size classes 1 – 4 ( $ 10 billion and more , $ 5 billion – $ 9 . 9 billion , $ 1 billion – $ 4 . 9 billion , and less than $ 1 billion ) receive the values 4 – 1 , respectively . For example , a top ranking given by one of the largest respondents is worth a value of “16” while a fourth - place vote placed by one of the smallest institutions registers a value of “1 . ” Finally , Institutional Investor re - expresses an analyst’s score as a percentage of the summed scores in a given category and then multiplies the score by 100 , which is the maximum possible score . Scores are cal - culated only for those analysts who were mentioned in at least ﬁve surveys for a given industry or category . We computed status measures for both the analyst and the investment bank from these scores , which were provided by Institutional Investor . To complete the measurement of an analyst’s status , two additional coding operations are necessary . First , for analysts who achieved a ranking in multiple industries , the maximum score was taken across these industries . American Journal of Sociology 408 Second , where Research Holdings indicated that multiple analysts covered a stock—typically , a senior analyst with junior analysts—the maximum status of these analysts is coded as the status of the analyst team . Finally , we computed an investment bank’s status as the mean status taken over all analysts employed by that bank in 1996 . Figure 3 , which depicts the hierarchy among the 194 investment banks in the Research Holdings database , illustrates a divide between high - and low - status banks that nicely parallels the case of Silicon Valley law ﬁrms . Again , the Lorenz curves and corresponding Gini coefﬁcients in this chart capture inequality both in the number of analysts employed , as well as the status of bank’s analysts . As we can see , there is stark inequality in the distribution of status , which cannot be reduced to differences in scale . In particular , 151 of the investment banks , or 78 % of the total , employed no analysts who commanded signiﬁcant status in the eyes of institutional investors . As with the law ﬁrms , mobility from year to year is slight . Only 15 of the 151 banks with no ranking analysts in 1996 employed such an analyst in 1997 , and only two of these had more than one such analyst . Thus , it seems reasonable to see the highest status investment banks as enjoying considerable security in their membership in the institutional interface , to regard middle - status banks to be on the periphery of that interface , and to consider the majority of low - status banks as observable outsiders . Control variables . —In our analysis of analyst’s tendency to issue sell recommendations , we controlled for three factors : whether the analyst was employed by a pure research ﬁrm , the tendency for peers of the focal analyst to issue a negative rating , and the relative accuracy of the analyst’s opinions . Research ﬁrm . —While the typical analyst works for an investment bank , certain analysts are employed by ﬁrms that are solely devoted to securities research . Given such ﬁrms’ lack of involvement in corporate ﬁnance activities as well as their decoupling of investment advice from trading services , such ﬁrms should be less subject to pressures to avoid negative sentiment . Thus , we compute a dummy variable that indicates whether the analyst works for one of the three major research ﬁrms that are included in the Research Holdings database : Duff & Phelps , Standard & Poor’s , and Value Line . Other analysts’ opinion . —The focus of our analysis is on the tendency to publish a dissenting , sell rating . However , as shown in table 3 , a small minority of stocks does attract signiﬁcant negative sentiment . It stands to reason that the more negative an analyst’s peers are the more likely is she to publish a sell rating . Thus , for every stock that an analyst covers , we calculate the mean opinion ( where “1” refers to a strong buy and “5” is a strong sell ) of the other analysts who cover the stock . We then average Middle - Status Conformity 409 Fig . 3 . —Hierarchy in the investment advice market : Lorenz curve for the number and status scores of analysts , by investment bank in 1996 . Variable p all analysts or the summed status scores . Broken line represents the cumulative number of analysts ( Gini p . 634 ) ; solid line represents cumulative status score ( Gini p . 933 ) . that score across all stocks that an analyst covers to compute an overall measure of whether the analyst is surrounded by negative sentiment . Forecast inaccuracy . —As discussed earlier , an actor’s status is fre - quently confounded with other stratifying variables—in particular , dif - ferential resource endowments , information access , or ability . It must be emphasized that the present context of the market for investment advice is unusual in that , according to orthodox “efﬁcient markets” theory , none of these factors should matter . In particular , it is presumed that , in their search for arbitrage opportunities , stock market participants instanta - neously eliminate any advantage that their peers may have ( see Sheffrin [ 1996 ] for review ) . For example , as soon as an investor or analyst learns of a piece of news and acts upon it , the rest of the market quickly follows suit . Indeed , this line of thinking has long been associated with the idea that analyst forecasts and advice have no value to investors and that , accordingly , analysts should disappear ( Fama 1965 ) . Moreover , many het - erodox theorists who are skeptical that the market achieves such a level of efﬁciency contend that , given the interpretive challenges involved in securities valuation , the typical analyst or investor is unlikely to possess a lasting edge ( e . g . , Dreman 1977 ; Zuckerman 1999 ) . American Journal of Sociology 410 Nevertheless , in light of economic models that expect a relationship between ability and “herding” ( e . g . , Scharfstein and Stein 1990 ; Zwiebel 1995 ) or “counter - signaling” ( Feltovich et al . 1999 ) , we consider the pos - sibility that variation in ability relates to the tendency to give a sell rating . In particular , we compute the relative inaccuracy of an analyst’s earnings forecasts . This measure is calculated by selecting the ﬁnal set of forecasts for ﬁscal year 1996 earnings per share ( EPS ) that were made at least six months prior to the end of that ﬁscal year . Analysts whose latest forecasts preceded the end of ﬁscal year 1995 were excluded ( compare with Hong et al . 2000 ) . For each analyst i covering ﬁrm f , we then compute the absolute value of the difference between the analyst’s estimate and the ﬁrm’s actual EPS ( ABSDIF if ) . The following Z - score then reﬂects the analyst’s degree of inaccuracy on a given stock : Z if p ( ABSDIF if - MABSDIF f ) / SDABSDIF f , where MABSDIF f and SDABSDIF f are , respectively , the mean and standard deviation of ABS - DIF across all analysts covering a stock . Finally , to calculate an analyst’s overall level of inaccuracy , the Z - score is averaged across all of the stocks that an analyst covers . While we have considered alternative accuracy measures ( see e . g . , Hong et al . 2000 ; Cooper , Day , and Lewis 1999 ) , we present the Z - score measure because it is the most straightforward and it correlates at a very high level with the alternative measures . Furthermore , none of these measures shows a signiﬁcant relationship with the status measures or with the tendency to give a negative rating . Table 4 gives summary statistics and a correlation matrix for the inde - pendent variables used in the analysis below . As can be seen , while the only previous article to examine the relationship between analyst status and forecast accuracy found a slight association ( Stickel 1992 ) , we ﬁnd no such association in our data . 29 The complete absence of a relationship is somewhat surprising . As Podolny ( 1993 ) argues , to the extent that au - diences regard status as a signal of quality , an actor cannot retain his status while consistently purveying low - quality wares . Indeed , it is likely that , despite their seeming lack of success at forecasting , high - status an - alysts are valued for other reasons . Nevertheless , we feel justiﬁed in con - cluding that there is at least a loose , socially mediated link ( Podolny 1993 ) between status and quality in this setting , as is typical of many others ( see e . g . , Posner 1990 on judges ; Schwartz 1987 ; Fine 1996 on politicians ; Kapsis 1989 ; Lang and Lang 1988 on artists ) . 29 Note that we similarly ﬁnd no association between status and success at forecasting 1995 EPS . Middle - Status Conformity 411 TABLE 4 Summary Statistics and Correlation Matrix for the Analyst Data Variables Summary Statistics Correlation Matrix N Mean SD Min Max 1 2 3 4 1 . Forecast inaccuracy . . . 2 , 477 (cid:1) . 06 . 52 (cid:1) 2 . 01 3 . 98 . . . 2 . Research ﬁrm . . . . . . . . . . 2 , 768 . 05 . 22 0 1 (cid:1) . 006 3 . Others’ opinion . . . . . . . . 2 , 652 2 . 05 . 44 1 5 . 055 . 050 4 . Analyst status score . . . 2 , 768 2 . 14 5 . 17 0 43 . 47 . 019 (cid:1) . 096 . 031 . . . 5 . Firm status score . . . . . . 2 , 768 2 . 13 2 . 86 0 10 . 84 . 023 (cid:1) . 173 . 054 . 551 STATISTICAL MODELS AND RESULTS Setting 1 : Silicon Valley Law Firms Statistical model . —The likelihood of a ﬁrm deciding to practice family law is analyzed using a hazard rate model , which is analogous to the conditional probability of an event at time t given that the event has not yet occurred . The rate can vary as a function of the time that a ﬁrm has existed . The use of the instantaneous hazard rate allows for an estimation of the changes of the event occurring while controlling for age dependence ( Tuma and Hannan 1984 ) . We model the hazard rate of family law announcement with piecewise constant exponential models in Transition Data Analysis ( Rohwer 1993 ) . This approach allows the inclusion of ﬁrm age while avoiding the mis - speciﬁcation that accompanies other functional forms . A piecewise con - stant exponential model splits the time axis into time periods . In our model , the time axis is split according to ﬁrm age . It assumes that transition rates are constant in each of these intervals . However , base rates vary freely across time periods . The assumption is that the period - speciﬁc baseline rate can vary across time periods , but the covariates have the same ( pro - portional ) effects . Findings . —Table 5 presents the estimation of the hazard of announcing family law as a function of ﬁrm status . Models 1 and 2 present the re - lationship between status and the announcement of a family law practice while excluding the control variables . As we can see , there is a negative relation between status and the hazard rate of family law practice an - nouncement , but this relationship reverses itself for the highest status ﬁrms . As demonstrated by the improvement in ﬁt from model 1 to model 2 , middle - status ﬁrms appear signiﬁcantly more likely to refrain from entering family law . 30 30 The ﬁndings in table 5 were replicated using a set of dummy variables that distin - guished top ﬁrms ( where elite law school graduates comprised more than 85 % of the ﬁrm’s attorneys ) from low - status outsider ﬁrms ( no elite attorneys ) . Consistent with 412 TABLE 5 MLE of Family Law Announcement for Silicon Valley Law Firms , 1946 – 96 Covariates ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) a Age : 0 – 3 years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 3 . 62 (cid:1) 3 . 55 (cid:1) 35 . 50 (cid:1) 35 . 14 (cid:1) 36 . 69 ( . 15 ) ( . 15 ) ( 4 . 05 ) ( 4 . 12 ) ( 4 . 05 ) 4 – 14 years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 5 . 17 (cid:1) 5 . 05 (cid:1) 36 . 12 (cid:1) 35 . 70 (cid:1) 37 . 26 ( . 16 ) ( . 16 ) ( 4 . 04 ) ( 4 . 11 ) ( 4 . 04 ) 14 (cid:2) years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 5 . 90 (cid:1) 5 . 76 (cid:1) 35 . 58 (cid:1) 35 . 02 (cid:1) 36 . 59 ( . 20 ) ( . 21 ) ( 4 . 02 ) ( 4 . 09 ) ( 4 . 01 ) Firm status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 1 . 44 * (cid:1) 3 . 44 * . . . (cid:1) 3 . 98 * (cid:1) 2 . 05 * ( . 37 ) ( . 94 ) ( 1 . 14 ) ( . 57 ) Firm status 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 . 59 * . . . 3 . 30 * 2 . 60 * ( 1 . 08 ) ( 1 . 28 ) ( 1 . 30 ) ln ( no . of partners ) . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 1 . 67 * (cid:1) 1 . 61 * (cid:1) 1 . 62 * ( . 39 ) ( . 39 ) ( . 39 ) ln ( no . of partners ) 2 . . . . . . . . . . 48 * . 51 * . 25 * ( . 14 ) ( . 14 ) ( . 14 ) ln ( no . of associates ) . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 1 . 09 * (cid:1) 1 . 10 * (cid:1) 1 . 12 * ( . 32 ) ( . 32 ) ( . 32 ) ln ( no . of associates ) 2 . . . . . . . . 26 * . 25 * . 50 * ( . 15 ) ( . 14 ) ( . 14 ) Relative scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 . 55 * 24 . 63 * 25 . 56 * ( 3 . 21 ) ( 3 . 25 ) ( 3 . 26 ) San Francisco branch . . . . . (cid:1) 2 . 56 * (cid:1) 2 . 45 * (cid:1) 2 . 45 * ( . 93 ) ( . 91 ) ( . 92 ) Other ( non – San Francisco ) branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 04 . 15 . 12 ( . 34 ) ( . 34 ) ( . 34 ) North Silicon Valley location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 49 * (cid:1) . 16 (cid:1) . 17 ( . 22 ) ( . 24 ) ( . 24 ) Partner growth . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 45 (cid:1) . 54 (cid:1) . 55 ( . 58 ) ( . 57 ) ( . 57 ) Partner attrition . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 1 . 50 (cid:1) 1 . 52 (cid:1) 1 . 54 ( 1 . 03 ) ( 1 . 02 ) ( 1 . 02 ) Log ( population density ) . . . 7 . 73 * 7 . 74 * 7 . 87 * ( . 95 ) ( . 97 ) ( . 94 ) Number of previous announcements . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 07 * (cid:1) . 07 * (cid:1) . 07 * ( . 01 ) ( . 01 ) ( . 01 ) Commercial law . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 25 (cid:1) . 53 * (cid:1) . 52 * ( . 30 ) ( . 30 ) ( . 31 ) Corporate law . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 1 . 00 * (cid:1) . 99 * (cid:1) 1 . 03 * ( . 27 ) ( . 27 ) ( . 27 ) Business law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 24 (cid:1) . 17 (cid:1) . 19 ( . 22 ) ( . 22 ) ( . 22 ) Security law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 2 . 16 * (cid:1) 1 . 96 * (cid:1) 2 . 03 * 413 TABLE 5 ( Continued ) Covariates ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) a ( . 53 ) ( . 52 ) ( . 53 ) Taxation law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 88 * (cid:1) . 85 * (cid:1) . 85 * ( . 26 ) ( . 26 ) ( . 26 ) Intellectual property law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 50 (cid:1) . 39 (cid:1) . 48 ( . 43 ) ( . 43 ) ( . 44 ) Insurance law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 65 * (cid:1) . 81 * (cid:1) . 82 * ( . 27 ) ( . 28 ) ( . 28 ) Labor / employment law . . . (cid:1) 1 . 21 * (cid:1) 1 . 25 * (cid:1) 1 . 28 * ( . 32 ) ( . 32 ) ( . 32 ) Estate / probate law . . . . . . . . . 85 * 1 . 06 * 1 . 00 * ( . 29 ) ( . 29 ) ( . 29 ) Bankruptcy law . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 * . 49 * . 47 * ( . 28 ) ( . 28 ) ( . 28 ) Environmental law . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 87 (cid:1) . 78 (cid:1) . 81 ( . 58 ) ( . 58 ) ( . 58 ) Health law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 06 . 12 (cid:1) . 09 ( . 89 ) ( . 88 ) ( . 88 ) Real estate law . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 15 (cid:1) . 21 (cid:1) . 24 ( . 22 ) ( . 23 ) ( . 23 ) Malpractice law . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 1 . 01 * (cid:1) 1 . 13 * (cid:1) 1 . 13 * ( . 37 ) ( . 38 ) ( . 38 ) Tort law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 44 * (cid:1) . 52 * (cid:1) . 55 * ( . 26 ) ( . 26 ) ( . 26 ) Personal injury law . . . . . . . . 39 * . 31 . 28 ( . 22 ) ( . 23 ) ( . 22 ) Criminal law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 17 (cid:1) . 02 (cid:1) . 03 ( . 24 ) ( . 25 ) ( . 25 ) Professional liability law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 10 . 16 . 14 ( . 65 ) ( . 65 ) ( . 66 ) Period : 1946 – 76 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 3 . 56 * (cid:1) 3 . 67 * (cid:1) 3 . 72 * ( . 65 ) ( . 69 ) ( . 66 ) 1977 – 81 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 1 . 96 * (cid:1) 2 . 03 * (cid:1) 2 . 10 * ( . 49 ) ( . 52 ) ( . 61 ) 1982 – 87 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 1 . 67 * (cid:1) 1 . 54 * (cid:1) 1 . 69 * ( . 39 ) ( . 40 ) ( . 39 ) Log likelihood . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 788 . 56 (cid:1) 785 . 82 (cid:1) 614 . 77 (cid:1) 606 . 71 (cid:1) 608 . 00 x 2 ( df ) vs . previous model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 . 48 ( 1 ) * . . . 16 . 12 ( 2 ) * . . . Note . — N p 3 , 341 for organization years , 516 for ﬁrms , and 130 for announcements . t - tests are one - sided . SEs are in parentheses . a Model 5 estimates an alternative speciﬁcation of status . * P ! . 05 . American Journal of Sociology 414 Model 3 excludes status and status squared but includes the full set of control variables described above . While we do not have the space to review these ﬁndings in detail , it is noteworthy that the observed patterns conform to our expectations . Thus , we see that ﬁrms that are wide in scope and not branch ofﬁces ( of San Francisco law ﬁrms ) are more likely to announce family law . In addition , ﬁrms specializing in corporate , com - mercial , securities , taxation , insurance , labor / employment , environmental , tort , and malpractice law were less likely to announce a specialty in family law than those devoted to estate planning ( including probate ) and bank - ruptcy law . Finally , the relationship between size and the announcement of family law is curvilinear in a manner that parallels the status effect . Midsize law ﬁrms are less likely to announce family law than smaller and larger ﬁrms . However , as indicated in model 4 , the hypothesized rela - tionship between status and family law announcement holds even when a wide range of control variables are included . Indeed , the inclusion of the status variables makes a signiﬁcant improvement to the ﬁt of the previous models . In model 5 , we examine an alternative speciﬁcation of status : a relative measure of status to insure that our ﬁnding is robust over time . We cal - culate an annual measure by subtracting each ﬁrm’s annual status from the mean status for that year . It is important that this speciﬁcation also yield a statistically signiﬁcant curvilinear effect to verify that our hy - pothesis is supported when relative status is considered at any given point in time . Results from this model parallel those in model 4 , which suggests that there is little meaningful variation over time in the status distribution . 31 Figure 4 provides a graph of the relationship between ﬁrm status and the likelihood of announcing an entry into family law , based on model 4 . 32 This graph suggests that low - status ﬁrms are the ﬁrst to announce the models presented here , we found that both the high - status ﬁrms and low - status outsiders were more likely to announce family law . 31 We would like to thank an anonymous reviewer for prompting us to examine al - ternative speciﬁcations that consider an annual relative status measure . We also tested other operationalizations of status ( dividing by the maximum status for each year , using a z - score based upon the mean and standard deviation for each year ) . Each operationalization produced the same statistically signiﬁcant effect , albeit with a weaker model ﬁt . 32 The hazard rate is transformed to the predicted probability of family law announce - ment using the following formulation , predicted probability of practice area announcement p 1 (cid:1) exp ( (cid:1) m ) , A where is the hazard rate of practice - area announcement . Other researchers have m A used this transformation as well ( Hannan and Carroll 1992 ; Carroll and Harrison 1994 ; Lee and Harrison 1998 ; Phillips 2001 ) . Note that the shape of the curve is more Middle - Status Conformity 415 Fig . 4 . —Predicted probability of announcement of family law ( 10 - year - old San Francisco branch ofﬁce with scope p . 10 , 20 partners , 40 associates , density p 184 in 1986 ) . entry into family law . This makes sense in that such ﬁrms are free of concern that they will ( further ) taint themselves with association with family law . They are followed by the high - status law ﬁrms , who feel relatively immune to such penalties . For both the high - and low - status ﬁrms , the announcement will not affect their position in the status hier - archy . It is the middle - status ﬁrms , which straddle the two hemispheres of the status hierarchy , that are the least likely to make the announcement . It is the risk in loss of upward mobility or , worse , the prospect of down - ward mobility that discourages the middle - status law ﬁrms from an - nouncing a practice in family law . Setting 2 : Securities Analysts Statistical model . —In table 6 , we use logistic regression to model the likelihood that a securities analyst gives at least one sell rating on the stocks she covers . In choosing the analyst as our unit of analysis , we collapse stock - level heterogeneity in the prevalence of sell ratings . In anal - important that its location on the y - axis , which is largely determined by the choice of various control variables . TABLE 6 Logistic Regression Analysis of the Publication of a “Sell” Recommendation , End of 1996 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Forecast inaccuracy : Linear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 041 ( . 130 ) Squared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 030 ( . 090 ) Research ﬁrm . . . . . . . 2 . 664 ( . 194 ) * 2 . 606 ( . 194 ) * 2 . 572 ( . 194 ) * 2 . 533 ( . 198 ) * 2 . 286 ( . 198 ) * 2 . 285 ( . 198 ) * Others’ opinion . . . . . 1 . 621 ( . 151 ) * 1 . 512 ( . 139 ) * 1 . 509 ( . 139 ) * 1 . 527 ( . 139 ) * 1 . 579 ( . 142 ) * 1 . 574 ( . 142 ) * Status score : Analyst—linear . . . . . (cid:1) . 044 ( . 016 ) * (cid:1) . 103 ( . 032 ) * (cid:1) . 052 ( . 042 ) Analyst—squared . . . . 003 ( . 001 ) * . 001 ( . 002 ) Firm—linear . . . . . . . . (cid:1) . 078 ( . 025 ) * (cid:1) . 636 ( . 078 ) * (cid:1) . 599 ( . 081 ) * Firm—squared . . . . . . . 065 ( . 008 ) * . 065 ( . 008 ) * Constant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 5 . 581 ( . 352 ) * (cid:1) 5 . 284 ( . 322 ) * (cid:1) 5 . 245 ( . 322 ) * (cid:1) 5 . 243 ( . 323 ) * (cid:1) 5 . 105 ( . 327 ) * (cid:1) 5 . 095 ( . 327 ) * N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 , 436 2 , 652 2 , 652 2 , 652 2 , 652 2 , 652 x 2 ( df ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 317 . 22 ( 4 ) 336 . 96 ( 3 ) 341 . 69 ( 4 ) 338 . 31 ( 3 ) 404 . 70 ( 4 ) 407 . 27 ( 6 ) Log likelihood . . . . . . . . . (cid:1) 838 . 64 (cid:1) 888 . 50 (cid:1) 886 . 1363 (cid:1) 887 . 82 (cid:1) 854 . 63 (cid:1) 853 . 35 Note . — SEs are in parentheses . * P ! . 05 . Middle - Status Conformity 417 yses not presented , we have also taken the recommendation ( analyst - stock ) as the unit of analysis and applied a ﬁxed - effects logit . These models include a dummy variable for every stock and thereby look only at within - stock variation . In addition , rather than looking only at whether an an - alyst issues any sell ratings , we applied both OLS and Tobit regression to analyze the proportion of an analyst’s ratings that is negative . Each of these alternatives holds drawbacks , however . The ﬁxed - effects logit is problematic because it necessarily eliminates the vast majority of stocks , which exhibits no variation in the tendency to receive a sell recommen - dation . Analysis of the proportion of negative ratings also seems inap - propriate because , as table 3 indicates , more than 85 % of analysts issued no sell ratings at all . Thus , while estimates from the alternative approaches all corroborated the hypothesized relationship between status and con - formity , we present results in table 6 from models that assess the log odds of issuing at least one sell rating . Findings . —The ﬁrst model in table 6 shows how the control variables affect the tendency to issue a sell recommendation . As expected , analysts who work in research ﬁrms are signiﬁcantly more likely to do so than those whose ﬁrms have corporate ﬁnance divisions . Further , analysts whose peers have issued negative ratings are more likely to render a negative opinion as well . But the accuracy of the analyst’s forecasts has no bearing on her tendency to express negative sentiment . Thus , even if there are substantial differences in ability between analysts , such differ - ences do not appear to be relevant to the phenomenon of interest . An analyst’s status , however , does signiﬁcantly affect the likelihood of issuing a sell rating . Model 2 includes a linear effect for the analyst’s status , and model 3 adds the quadratic term . As indicated both by the signiﬁcance and direction of the coefﬁcients as well as the improved ﬁt of these models , the IUS conjecture appears to be quite evident in this setting : as predicted , the highest and lowest ranking analysts are most likely to issue a sell recommendation . It is worth stressing that the main effect of status , as presented in model 2 , is negative : in general , the higher the rank , the less likely the analyst is to make a negative rating . This ﬁnding makes sense and parallels what we found among Silicon Valley law ﬁrms . To the extent that a certain course of action deﬁnes a role , incumbents in that role are more likely than others to conform to that behavior . However , the highest status actors , who enjoy a signiﬁcant degree of security in their role incumbency , feel less encumbered by such role prescriptions . 33 33 This effect contrasts with that found by Hayward and Boeker ( 1998 ) among the analysts whose banks had recently underwritten a securities offering for the ﬁrms they covered . The difference between the two studies may be due to two factors . First , American Journal of Sociology 418 Interestingly , the status of the investment bank appears to be more important than that of the analyst in producing the IUS curve in this setting . Models 4 and 5 parallel models 2 and 3 with the mean status of the analyst’s investment bank replacing her own status as a predictor . As may be seen by comparing the ﬁt of model 3 ( x 2 p 341 . 69 ) and model 5 ( x 2 p 404 . 70 ) , the investment bank’s status has considerably greater ex - planatory power than does the analyst’s status . 34 Indeed , model 6 , which includes the linear and squared terms for both bank and analyst status shows no independent effect of analyst status net of bank status . Thus , it is the overall status of the bank that deﬁnes whether an analyst is a player and the degree of security an analyst enjoys . This implies that a mitigation of the insecurity is felt by the middle - status analyst when she works at a high - status bank and vice versa . 35 To depict the linear and quadratic effects of bank status , we convert the logit ( log odds ) of pub - lishing a sell order into a probability and graph it against the observed range of bank status in ﬁgure 5 . This chart closely mirrors the family law announcement patterns in ﬁgure 4 . The analysts who work for the highest and lowest status banks are most likely to risk publishing a sell order . CONCLUSION We have pursued two principal objectives in this article . First , we aimed to give a ﬁrmer theoretical foundation to the long - standing conjecture that there is an inverted U - shaped relationship between status and con - formity . The heart of our theoretical framework lies in the recognition that there exist only three possible locations with respect to the social boundary that separates role incumbents from outsiders : one can straddle it or reside on either side of it . We argued that the IUS curve is generated through the mapping of two psychological orientations—identiﬁcation since Hayward and Boeker use the published Institutional Investor rankings , their status measures are necessarily truncated below the very top of the status hierarchy . Thus , they may be capturing the quadratic , rather than the linear , effect of status . The second issue relates to the ﬁrst . In particular , since higher status banks are more likely to be underwriters , it may be that their status measure captures differences between high - and middle - status analysts rather than between high and low . It is quite apparent , however , that when the full set of analysts is considered , the main effect of status on the probability of issuing a sell rating is negative . 34 As with the law ﬁrm study , these ﬁndings were replicated using dummy variables that distinguished top analysts and ﬁrms from low - status outsiders . 35 The nesting of analysts within banks suggests the possibility of an interaction effect between analyst and bank status ( Hayward and Boeker 1998 ) . We do not present such results here because ( a ) tests for interaction effects produced marginal improvements in the ﬁt of the models ; and ( b ) the interpretation of such interaction effects is com - plicated by the presence of both linear and squared terms for both status variables . Middle - Status Conformity 419 Fig . 5 . —Predicted probability of making a “sell” recommendation as a function of ﬁrm status ( 194 ﬁrms , 1996 ; others’ opinions p 2 , research ﬁrm p 0 , analyst status p 2 . 14 ) . with a role and security in one’s role incumbency—into three structural locations . However , this mapping is highly conditioned on key contextual factors . Indeed , the second distinguishing feature of our framework is the delineation of guidelines for validating the IUS curve empirically . We argued that it must be possible to distinguish status from other stratifying variables ; that the interface must command strong identiﬁcation among middle - status actors ; and that the status structure must confer security to the top - ranked actors , give some prospect of mobility to the middle ranked , and render the lowest ranked actors observable outsiders . We also suggested that , in undertaking the action in question , the actor must face a signiﬁcant risk of delegitimation . These guidelines set the stage for the second objective of this article : the validation of the IUS conjecture in two different settings : the Silicon Valley legal services market and the market for investment advice . We pointed to several key features shared by these contexts , which make them particularly appropriate for a test of the IUS conjecture . Particularly noteworthy was the identiﬁcation of tiered market segments or hemi - spheres such that incumbents of the lower tier were effectively observable outsiders to the upper tier . In addition , middle - status actors in both mar - kets faced the troubling dilemma of considering a course of action that , while potentially beneﬁcial , constituted prima facie evidence that they were not players in the high - status interface . Finally , unlike most previous American Journal of Sociology 420 research on the IUS curve , each of the contexts examined here allowed for the separation of status from variables that are typically confounded with it . That we found strong evidence for middle - status conformity in both markets helps reassure any doubts about the validity of either application . It must be noted that in reafﬁrming the idea of middle - status conformity we intend not to close off lines of inquiry , but to set the stage for further research into these and related matters . Indeed , while we have identiﬁed two contexts that ﬁt within our scope conditions , it is clear that many settings do not . It follows that these conditions represent contextual factors that should engender characteristic changes in the relationship between status and conformity across settings . For example , as argued above , where the status structure is such that no observable outsiders exist , status should have a negative , linear relationship with conformity . Similarly , if the status structure is not sufﬁciently stable to provide security to the highest ranking analysts , then their freedom to deviate should evaporate . Moreover , one may imagine interaction effects that affect the psycho - logical orientations that underlie the IUS curve . For example , the tenure of an actor’s role incumbency may heighten the security that a high - status actor feels ( Berkowitz and Macaulay 1961 ) . In addition , the presence of alternative interfaces with which to identify should lessen one’s anxiety about being on the periphery of a focal audience’s attention . Finally , different kinds of actions should elicit different relationships between status and conformity . In particular , the foregoing theoretical framework predicts that the IUS curve should arise only where an action poses a threat of delegitimation , but not so threatening that even high - status ac - tors are made to feel insecure . 36 Thus , the ultimate validation of the proposed framework should come only when the proposed scope conditions are transformed into contextual variables and are then tested for their implied interaction with the IUS curve . By making such predictions explicit , we hope to have erected a solid foundation for future research . In addition , we would like to high - light three general theoretical implications of our analysis . 36 We have investigated this last issue in the case of Silicon Valley law ﬁrms through an examination of the relationship between status and the hazard of adoption of various practice areas , in addition to family law . These results , which we do not display due to space constraints , conﬁrm our expectation that the IUS curve is far from ubiquitous . For example , status has a negative and linear effect on the adoption of personal injury law , a ﬁnding that reﬂects the fact that , relative to family law , personal injury is more deeply discrediting ( see , e . g . , Heinz and Laumann 1982 , p . 69 ) and therefore avoided even by those who are secure in their high status . Middle - Status Conformity 421 Role and Status in Markets First , it is noteworthy that our perspective stands at the intersection of two related themes in recent economic sociology : the market as role struc - ture and the market as status structure . White and colleagues ( White 1981 a ; 1981 b ; 1988 ; Leifer 1985 ; Leifer and White 1987 ; White and Eccles 1987 ) have been most prominent in advocating the ﬁrst view , which sees the market as comprising a system of interlocking producer roles . This identity order gives coherence and stability to the market , but only if there is conformity : producers must play recognized roles lest they hinder the acts of cross - product comparison that sustain the market ( White 1981 a ; Zuckerman 1999 ) . Podolny ( 1993 , 1994 ) has been inﬂuential in advocating the second perspective , whereby the market is composed of a hierarchy of players ordered on the basis of their perceived quality . He argues that status positions tend to become rigidiﬁed such that higher status actors earn consistently greater returns than lower status actors independent of their relative quality—but only if they do not sully their status through association with low - status alters . These returns to status extend status hierarchies over time , reinforcing returns to status ( Podolny and Phillips 1996 ) . Moreover , status may become a resource that can be deployed outside the setting where it was originally conferred ( e . g . , Stuart , Hoang , and Hybels 1999 ; Mavrinac 1999 ) . While these two conceptions of the market do not conﬂict with one another , they have so far resisted theoretical integration . But in highlight - ing the relationship between an actor’s status and the degree of his role incumbency , the present analysis suggests a possible basis for such a syn - thesis . A key feature of any analysis of the market as role order is the tendency for sellers who deviate from recognized roles or categories to be penalized by audiences who cannot make sense of their offerings ( Zuck - erman 1999 ) . However , as stressed here , whether or not an actor is rec - ognized as violating role expectations depends on his status . For the very highest and lowest status actors , deviation is essentially irrelevant : ac - ceptance of the former and rejection of the latter as role occupants is preordained . As such , it is the middle - status sellers who face the strongest pressure to play expected market roles . Indeed , whereas existing concep - tions of the market as role structure imply a static equilibrium of role - playing sellers , the recognition that those at the top and bottom of hi - erarchies are least likely to conform inserts a basis for disequilibrium . That is , the decoupling of role incumbency from role performance typical of either end of a status hierarchy provides the basis for the emergence of new types of behavior , eventually resulting in different role structures . 37 37 The present discussion does not mean to exclude additional bases for nonconformity in such roles as autonomy in a market topology ( Burt 1992 , chap . 6 ) . American Journal of Sociology 422 Role Assignment and Nonconformity This proposed integration of status and role in markets also suggests a solution to a more general problem that has long plagued role theory ( see , e . g . , Goode 1960 ) . In particular , if we deﬁne a role on the basis of the normative prescriptions followed by incumbents , nonconformity poses a problem : Do we regard norm - breakers as occupants of their supposed roles ? If we do not , then we must do away with the many roles in which normative behavior is the exception rather than the rule . If we do , then we would seemingly have little basis for distinguishing incumbents from others . One radical solution to this problem , advocated by network theory , has been the delineation of roles solely on the basis of patterns in social relations that have been abstracted from their content ( e . g . , Burt 1976 ; White , Boorman , and Breiger 1976 ; Winship and Mandel 1983 ; see also Nadel 1957 ) . But while attractive , this structuralist approach falters when confronted with the fact that the same pattern of ties takes on different meaning and generates different effects depending on the types of role relationship involved ( e . g . , Podolny and Baron 1997 ) . The present analysis suggests an alternative way of resolving this prob - lem . In particular , we stress that there exist two bases for assigning an actor to a role : his actions and his status . In general , those who conform to audience expectations gain recognition as a role incumbent . However , as there typically exist “entry barriers” to a given role , certain candidates are likely to be denied such recognition regardless of how slavishly they conform . Conversely , when a role incumbent has achieved a high status , his status becomes more salient than his actions in determining his ability to retain such recognition . Thus , while the problem of nonconformity surely renders the identiﬁcation of role incumbents problematic , such deviation is inherent in the intersection of status and role . Nonconformity does not imply the absence of role prescriptions but simply that a can - didate’s actions are not the sole basis by which she gains validation as a role incumbent . Accordingly , the oft - noted fact that , to gain membership , outsiders must demonstrate greater conformity than is required of incum - bents to retain membership , reﬂects the fact that both status and behavior ﬁgure importantly in an audience’s assignments of identity . Ascription with Achievement In closing , we note two interlocking paradoxes . First , whereas the notion of conformity would seem to imply a static social order , we have pointed out that there must be some prospect of ( at least , downward ) mobility for an actor to feel pressure to conform . If an actor’s structural position is ﬁxed , her actions are irrelevant . As we have stressed here , an actor Middle - Status Conformity 423 conforms when both recognition as a player and denial of such recognition loom large . Thus , the notion of a fashion - conscious parvenu class is a feature of societies where new opportunities for mobility have been in - troduced ( e . g . , Riesman [ 1950 ] 1953 ; Whyte 1956 ; Laumann and House 1970 ) . A second paradox immediately follows : while pressure for con - formity depends on expectations of mobility , there would be no variance in the degree of conformity if mobility were determined purely on the basis of actors’ behavior . Such heterogeneity emerges only where prior identities inﬂuence current identity assignments . If actions are all that matter , an actor’s structural position is irrelevant . In sum , middle - status conformity reﬂects an enduring feature of modern society and economy : we reach the positions that we do on the basis of our actions and on the pre - existing identities we have been assigned . The IUS curve reﬂects the characteristic mixture of achievement and ascription that underlies our location in social structure . REFERENCES Abbott , Andrew . 1988 . The System of Professions : An Essay on the Division of Expert Labor . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Abel , Richard L . 1989 . American Lawyers . New York : Oxford University Press . Asch , Solomon . 1951 . “Effects of Group Pressure upon the Modiﬁcation and Distortion of Judgment . ” Pp . 177 – 96 in Groups , Leadership , and Men , edited by Harold Guetzkow . Pittsburgh : Carnegie Press . Avery , Christopher N . , and Judith N . Chevalier . 1999 . “Herding over the Career . ” Economics Letters 63 : 327 – 33 . Becker , Marshall H . 1970 . “Sociometric Location and Innovativeness : Reformulation and Extension of the Diffusion Model . ” American Sociological Review 35 : 267 – 82 . Berger , Joseph , M . Hamit Fisek , Robert Z . Norma , and Morris Zelditch , Jr . 1977 . Status Characteristics in Social Interactions : An Expectations States Approach . New York : Elsevier . Berkowitz , Leonard , and Jacqueline R . Macaulay . 1961 . “Some Effects of Differences in Status Level and Status Stability . ” Human Relations 14 : 135 – 47 . Blau , Peter M . 1960 . “Patterns of Deviation in Work Groups . ” Sociometry 23 : 245 – 61 . ——— . 1963 . Dynamics of Bureaucracy : A Study of Interpersonal Relations in Two Government Agencies . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Browning , E . S . 1995 . “Following Instructions from Smith Barney : An Analyst with Bearish Comments Is Silent . ” Wall Street Journal , May 2 : C1 . Burk , James . 1988 . Values in the Marketplace : The American Stock Market under Federal Securities Law . New York : Walter de Gruyter . Burt , Ronald S . 1976 . “Positions in Networks . ” Social Forces 55 : 93 – 122 . ——— . 1982 . Toward a Structural Theory of Action : Network Models of Social Structure , Perception , and Action . New York : Academic Press . ——— . 1992 . Structural Holes : The Social Structure of Competition . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press . Cancian , Frank . 1967 . “Stratiﬁcation and Risk – Taking : A Theory Tested on Agricultural Innovation . ” American Sociological Review 32 : 912 – 27 . ——— . 1979 . The Innovator’s Situation : Upper - Middle - Class Conservatism in Agricultural Communities . Stanford , Calif . : Stanford University Press . American Journal of Sociology 424 Carlin , Jerome E . 1962 . Lawyers on Their Own . New Brunswick , N . J . : Rutgers University Press . Carroll , Glenn R . , and J . Richard Harrison . 1994 . “On the Historical Efﬁciency of Competition between Organizational Populations . ” American Journal of Sociology 100 : 720 – 49 . Chevalier , Judith N . and Glenn Ellison . 1999 . “Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers . ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 : 389 – 432 . Coleman , James S . , Elihu Katz , and Herbert Menzel . 1966 . Medical Innovation : A Diffusion Study . New York : Bobbs - Merrill . Cooper , Rick A . , Theodore E . Day , and Craig M . Lewis . 1999 . “Following the Leader : A Study of Individual Analysts Earnings Forecasts . ” Working Paper no . 98 - 10 . Financial Markets Research Center , Vanderbilt University , Owen Graduate School of Business . Darlin , D . 1983 . “Picking a Loser : Young Analyst Deﬁed ‘Experts’ and Foresaw Baldwin - United’s Ills . ” Wall Street Journal , September 28 , pp . 1 , 14 . DiMaggio , Paul M . , and Walter W . Powell . 1983 . “The Iron Cage Revisited : Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields . ” American Sociological Review 48 : 147 – 60 . Dittes , James E . , and Harold H . Kelley . 1956 . “Effects of Different Conditions of Acceptance upon Conformity to Group Norms . ” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 53 : 100 – 107 . Douglas , Mary . 1966 . Purity and Danger : An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution and Taboo . New York : Praeger . Dreman , David N . 1977 . Psychology and the Stock Market : InvestmentStrategybeyond Random Walk . New York : Amacom . Dugar , Amitabh , and Siva Nathan . 1995 . “The Effects of Investment Banking Relationships on Financial Analysts’ Earnings Forecasts and Investment Recommendations . ” Contemporary Accounting Research 12 : 131 – 60 . Eccles , Robert G . , and Dwight B . Crane . 1987 . Doing Deals : Investment Banks at Work . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Fama , Eugene F . 1965 . “Random Walks in Security Prices . ” Financial Analysts Journal 41 : 55 – 59 . Feltovich , Nick , Rick Harbaugh , and Ted To . 1999 . “Too Cool for School ? : Signaling and Countersignaling . ” Working Paper no . 1999 - 21 . Claremon Colleges , Working Papers in Economics . Festinger , Leon . 1953 . “An Analysis of Compliant Behavior . ” Pp . 232 – 55 in Group Relations at the Crossroads , edited by Muzafer Sherif and Milbourne O . Wilson . New York : Harper . Festinger , Leon , Stanley Schachter , and Kurt Back . 1950 . Social Pressure in Informal Groups . New York : Harper . Fine , Gary Alan . 1996 . “Reputational Entrepreneurs and the Memory of Incompetence : Melting Supporters , Partisan Warriors , and Images of President Harding . ” American Journal of Sociology 101 : 1159 – 93 . Francis , Jennifer , and Donna Philbrick . 1993 . “Analysts’ Decisions as Products of a Multi - Task Environment . ” Journal of Accounting Research 31 : 216 – 30 . Frank , Robert H . 1985 . Choosing the Right Pond : Human Behavior and the Quest for Status . New York : Oxford University Press . Frank , Robert H . , and Philip J . Cook . 1995 . The Winner - Take - All Society . New York : Penguin . Galaskiewicz , Joseph , and Ronald S . Burt . 1991 . “Interorganization Contagion in Corporate Philanthropy . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 36 : 88 – 105 . Gartrell , John W . 1977 . “Status , Inequality , and Innovation : The Green Revolution in Andra Pradesh , India . ” American Sociological Review 42 : 318 – 37 . Middle - Status Conformity 425 Goode , William J . 1960 . “Norm Commitment and Conformity to Role - Status Obligations . ” American Journal of Sociology 66 : 246 – 58 . ——— . 1979 . The Celebration of Heroes . Berkeley : University of California Press . Hagan , John A . 1992 . “The Poverty of a Classless Criminology—the American Society of Criminology 1991 Presidential Address . ” Criminology 30 : 1 – 19 . Hagan , John A . , R . Gillis , and John Simpson . 1985 . “The Class Structure of Gender and Delinquency : Toward a Power - Control Theory of Common Delinquent Behavior . ” American Journal of Sociology 90 : 1151 – 79 . Han , Shin - Kap . 1994 . “Mimetic Isomorphism and Its Effect on the Audit Services Market . ” Social Forces 73 : 637 – 63 . Hannan , Michael T . , and Glenn R . Carroll . 1992 . Dynamics of Organizational Populations . New York : Oxford University Press . Hannan , Michael T . , and John Freeman . 1989 . Organizational Ecology . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press . Haunschild , Pamela R . 1994 . “How Much Is That Company Worth ? : Interorganizational Relationships , Uncertainty , and Acquisition Premiums . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 39 : 391 – 411 . Harvey , O . J . , and Conrad Consalvi . 1960 . “Status and Conformity to Pressures in Informal Groups . ” Journal of Abnormal Social Psychology 60 : 182 – 87 . Hayward , Mathew L . A . , and Warren Boeker . 1998 . “Power and Conﬂicts of Interest in Professional Firms : Evidence from Investment Banking . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 43 : 1 – 22 . Heinz , John P . , and Edward O . Laumann . 1982 . Chicago Lawyers : The SocialStructure of the Bar . Evanston , Ill . : Northwestern University Press . Hewitt , John P . 1989 . Dilemmas of the American Self . Philadelphia : Temple University Press . Hewitt , John P . , and Randall Stokes . 1975 . “Disclaimers . ” American Sociological Review 40 : 1 – 11 . Hoffman , Auren . 1997 . “Comment : Good Times Aren’t Rolling throughout State . ” Business Journal , December 22 , p . 47 Hollander , E . P . 1958 . “Conformity , Status , and Idiosyncrasy Credit . ” Psychological Review 65 : 117 – 27 . ——— . 1960 . “Competence and Conformity in the Acceptance of Inﬂuence . ” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 61 : 365 – 69 . Homans , George C . 1950 . The Human Group . New York : Harcourt , Brace . ——— . 1961 . Social Behavior : Its Elementary Forms . New York : Harcourt , Brace , and World . Hong , Harrison , Jeffrey D . Kubik , and Amit Solomon . 2000 . “Security Analysts’ Career Concerns and Herding of Earnings Forecasts . ” Rand Journal of Economics 31 : 21 – 144 . Institutional Investor . 1999 . “The 1999 All - America Research Team . ” October , pp . 107 – 211 . Jensen , Gary F . , and Kevin Thompson . 1990 . “What’s Class Got to Do with It ? A Further Examination of Power - Control Theory . ” American Journal of Sociology 95 : 1009 – 23 . Kapsis , Robert E . 1989 . “Reputation Building and the Firm Art World : The Case of Alfred Hitchcock . ” Sociological Quarterly 30 : 5 – 35 . Kuran , Timur . 1995 . Private Truths , Public Lies : The Social ConsequencesofPreference Falsiﬁcation . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press . Laderman , Jeffrey M . 1998 . “Wall Street’s Spin Game : Stock Analysts Often Have a Hidden Agenda . ” Business Week , October 5 , pp . 148 – 56 . Lamont , Owen . 1995 . “Macroeconomic Forecasts and Microeconmic Forecasters . ” Working Paper no . 5284 . National Bureau of Economic Research , Cambridge , Mass . American Journal of Sociology 426 Lang , Gladys Engel , and Kurt Lang . 1988 . “Reputation and Renown : The Survival of Artistic Reputation . ” American Journal of Sociology 94 : 79 – 109 . Laumann , Edward O . , and James S . House . 1970 . “Living Room Styles and Social Attributes : The Patterning of Material Artifacts in a Modern Urban Community . ” Pp . 189 – 203 in The Logic of Social Hierarchies , edited by Edward O . Laumann , Paul M . Siegel , and Robert W . Hodge . Chicago : Markham Publishing . Lee , Jeho , and J . Richard Harrison . 1998 . “Innovation and Industry Bifurcation : The Emergence of Strategic Groups . ” Working paper . University of Texas , Dallas School of Management . Leifer , Eric M . 1985 . “Markets as Mechanisms : Using a Role Structure . ” Social Forces 64 : 442 – 72 . Leifer , Eric M . , and Harrison C . White . 1987 . “A Structural Approach to Markets . ” In Intercorporate Relations : The Structural Analysis of Business , edited by Mark Mizruchi and Michael Schwartz . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Lin , Hsiou - Wei , and Maureen F . McNichols . 1998 . “Underwriter Relationships , Analysts’ Earnings Forecasts , and Investment Recommendations . ” Journal of Accounting and Economics 25 : 101 – 27 . Marsden , Peter V . , and Noah E . Friedkin . 1993 . “Network Studies of Social Inﬂuence . ” Sociological Methods and Research 22 : 127 – 51 . Marsh , C . Paul , and A . Lee Coleman . 1956 . “Group Inﬂuences and Agricultural Innovations : Tentative Findings and Hypotheses . ” American Journal of Sociology 61 : 588 – 94 . Martindale & Hubbell , Inc . 1945 – 96 . Martindale and Hubbell Law Directory . Summit , N . J . : Martindale & Hubbell . Matsueda , Ross L . , Rosemary Gartner , Irving Piliavin , and Michael Polakowski . 1992 . “The Prestige of Criminal and Conventional Occupations : A Subcultural Model of Criminal Activity . ” American Sociological Review 57 : 752 – 70 . Matza , David , and Gresham M . Sykes . 1961 . “Juvenile Delinquency and Subterranean Values . ” American Sociological Review 26 : 712 – 19 . Mavrinac , Sarah . 1999 . “Market Development and the Matthew Effect : An Analysis of Reputation , Information Collection , and IPO Markets . ” Unpublished manuscript . Richard University of Western Ontario , Ivey School of Business . Mclean , Bethany . 2000 . “Who Is Ashok Kumar and Why Is He So Loud ? ” Fortune , September 18 , pp . 295 – 96 . McNichols , Maureen , and Patricia C . O’Brien . 1997 . “Self - Selection and Analyst Coverage . ” Journal of Accounting Research 35 ( suppl . ) : 167 – 99 . Menzel , Herbert 1960 . “Innovation , Integration , and Marginality : A Survey of Physicians . ” American Sociological Review 25 : 704 – 13 . Merton , Robert K . 1968 . Social Theory and Social Struture , enlarged ed . New York : Free Press . Meyer , John W . , and Brian Rowan . 1977 . “Institutionalized Organizations : Formal Structure as Myth and Ceremony . ” American Journal of Sociology 83 : 340 – 63 Miller , George A . 1956 . “The Magical Number Seven , Plus or Minus Two : Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information . ” Psychological Review 63 : 81 – 97 . Morley , Alfred . 1988 . “Overview of Financial Analysis . ” Pp . 3 – 33 in The Financial Analysts Handbook , edited by S . N . Levine . Homewood , Ill . : Irwin . Moscovici , Serge , and Charlan Nemeth . 1974 . “Social Inﬂuence II : Minority Inﬂuence . ” Pp . 217 – 49 in Social Psychology : Classic and Contemporary Integrations , edited by Charlan Nemeth . Chicago : Rand McNally . Nadel , S . F . 1957 . The Theory of Social Structure . London : Cohen & West . Nye F . Ivan , James F . Short , Jr . , and Virgil J . Olson . 1958 . “Socioeconomic Status and Delinquent Behavior . ” American Journal of Sociology 63 : 381 – 89 . Phillips , Damon J . 2001 . “The Promotion Paradox : The Relationship between Middle - Status Conformity 427 Organizational Mortality and Employee Promotion Chances in Silicon Valley Law Firms , 1946 – 1996 . ” American Journal of Sociology 106 ( 4 ) : 1058 – 98 . Podolny , Joel M . 1993 . “A Status - Based Model of Market Competition . ” American Journal of Sociology 98 : 829 – 72 . ——— . 1994 . “Market Uncertainty and the Social Character of Economic Exchange . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 39 : 458 – 83 . Podolny , Joel M . , and James N . Baron . 1997 . “Resources and Relationships : Social Networks and Mobility in the Workplace . ” American Sociological Review 62 : 673 – 93 . Podolny , Joel M . , and Damon J . Phillips . 1996 . “The Dynamics of Organizational Status . ” Industrial and Corporate Change 5 : 453 – 72 . Posner , Richard A . 1990 . Cardozo : A Study in Reputation . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Ranulf , Svend . 1938 . Moral Indignation and Middle Class Psychology : A Sociological Study . Copenhagen : Levin & Munksgaard . Rao , Hayagreeva , and Kumar Sivakumar . 1999 . “Institutional Sources of Boundary - Spanning Structures : The Establishment of Investor Relations Departments in the Fortune 500 Industrials . ” Organization Science 10 : 27 – 42 . Reuters . 1999 a . “The 1999 Reuters Survey of U . S . Mid to Smaller CompanyInvestment Research , Sales and Trading , Investment Banking . ” Originated by Tempest Consultants Inc . Sponsored by Reuters . ——— . 1999 b . “The 1999 Reuters Survey of U . S . Larger Company Investment Research , Sales and Trading , Investment Banking . ” Originated by Tempest Consultants Inc . Sponsored by Reuters . Ridgeway , Cecilia L . 1978 . “Conformity , Group - Oriented Motivation , and Status Attainment in Small Groups . ” Social Psychology 41 : 175 – 88 . ——— . 1981 . “Nonconformity , Competence , and Inﬂuence in Groups : A Test of Two Theories . ” American Sociological Review 46 : 333 – 47 . Riesman , David . ( 1950 ) 1953 . The Lonely Crowd : A Study of the Changing American Character . Garden City , N . Y . : Doubleday Anchor Books . Rohwer , Gotz . 1993 . TDA : Transition Data Analysis , ver . 5 . 2 . Working papers . Ruch Universitat Cochum . Saloner , Garth , Andrea Shepard , and Joel M . Podolny . 2001 . Strategic Management . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Saxenian , AnnaLee . 1981 . “Silicon Valley and Spatial Structure : The Industrial Basis of Urbanization in Santa Clara County , California . ” Working Paper no . 345 . University of California , Berkeley , Institute of Urban and Regional Development . Scharfstein , David S . , and Jeremy C . Stain . 1990 . “Herd Behavior and Investment . ” American Economic Review 80 : 465 – 79 . Schwartz , Barry . 1987 . George Washington : The Making of an American Symbol . New York : Free Press . Sheffrin , Steven M . 1996 . Rational Expectations , 2d ed . New York : Cambridge University Press . Sherif , Muzafer . 1935 . “A Study in Some Social Factors in Perception . ” Archives of Psychology , no . 187 . Shocker , Alan D . , Moshe Ben Akiva , Bruno Boccara , and Prakash Nedungadi . 1991 . “Consideration Set Inﬂuences on Customer Decision Making and Choice Issues , Models , and Suggestions . ” Marketing Letters 2 ( August ) : 181 – 98 . Siconolﬁ , Michael . 1992 . “Under Pressure : At Morgan Stanley , Analysts Were Urged to Soften Harsh Views . ” Wall Street Journal , July 14 , A1 . ——— . 1995 . “Incredible ‘Buys’ : Many Companies Press Analysts to Steer Clear of Negative Ratings . ” Wall Street Journal , July 19 , A1 . Siglienti , Stefano , Tracy Tefertiller , John Wenstrup , and John Wood . 1999 . “Internet Valuations : Surveying the Landscape . ” Technical Report no . 82 . Stanford University , Graduate School of Business . American Journal of Sociology 428 Simmel , Georg . ( 1904 ) 1971 . “Fashion . ” Pp . 294 – 323 in Georg Simmel : On Individuality and Social Forms , edited by Donald N . Levine . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Smigel , Erwin O . 1969 . The Wall Street Lawyer . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . Stickel , Scott E . 1990 . “Predicting Individual Analyst Earnings Forecasts . ” Journal of Accounting Research 28 : 409 – 17 . ——— . 1992 . “Reputation and Performance among Security Analysts . ” Journal of Finance 47 : 1811 – 36 . Stinchcombe , Arthur L . 1964 . Rebellion in a Classroom . Chicago : Quadrangle Books . Stone , Gregory P . 1962 . “Appearance and the Self : A Slightly Revised Version . ” Pp . 86 – 118 in Human Nature and Social Process , edited by Arnold Rose . Boston : Houghton Mifﬂin . Stuart , Toby E . , Ha Hoang , and Ralph C . Hybels . 1999 . “Interorganizational Endorsements and the Performance of Entrepreneurial Ventures . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 44 : 315 – 49 . Suchman , Mark C . 1993 . “On the Role of Law Firms in the Structuration of Silicon Valley . ” Working Paper , series 11 . Presented to the 1993 Annual Meeting of the Law and Society Association , Chicago , July . Sutherland , Edwin . 1983 . White Collar Crime : The Uncut Version . New Haven , Conn . : Yale University Press . Tannenbaum , Jeffrey A . , and Lee Berton . 1987 . “By the Numbers : How One Analyst Scores Big by Finding the Dark Side . ” Wall Street Journal , August 4 , C1 . Tittle , Charles R . , and Robert F . Meier . 1990 . “Specifying the SES - Delinquency Relationship . ” Criminology 28 : 271 – 99 . Tittle , Charles R . , Wayne J . Villemez , and Douglas A . Smith . 1978 . “The Myth of Social Class and Criminality : An Empirical Assessment of the Empirical Evidence . ” American Sociological Review 43 : 643 – 56 . Tuma , Nancy Brandon , and Michael T . Hannan . 1984 . Social Dynamics : Models and Methods . Orlando , Fla . : Academic Press . Urban , Glen L . , Bruce D . Weinberg , and John R Hauser . 1996 . “Premarket Forecasting of Really - New Products . ” Journal of Marketing 60 ( January ) : 47 – 60 . Useem , Michael . 1993 . Executive Defense : Shareholder Power and Corporate Reorganization . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press . ——— . 1996 . Investor Capitalism : How Money Managers are Changing the Face of Corporate America . New York : Basic Books . Veblen , Thorstein . [ 1899 ] 1960 . The Theory of the Leisure Class : An Economic Study of Institutions . New York : Mentor . Wahrman , Ralph , and Meredith D . Pugh . 1972 . “Competence and Conformity : Another Look at Hollander’s Study . ” Sociometry 35 : 376 – 86 . ——— . 1974 . “Sex , Nonconformity , and Inﬂuence . ” Sociometry 37 : 137 – 47 . Weber , Max . ( 1922 ) 1946 . “Class , Status , Party . ” Pp . 180 – 95 in From Max Weber : Essays in Sociology , edited by H . H . Gerth and C . Wright Mills . New York : Oxford University Press . Weimann , Gabriel . 1982 . “On the Importance of Marginality : One More Step into the Two - Step Flow of Communication . ” American Sociological Review 47 : 764 – 73 . White , Harrison C . 1981 a . “Where Do Markets Come From ? ” American Journal of Sociology 87 : 517 – 47 . ——— . 1981 b . “Production Markets as Induced Role Structures . ” Sociological Methodology 12 : 1 – 57 . ——— . 1988 . “Varieties of Markets . ” Pp . 226 – 60 in Social Structures : A Network Approach , edited by Barry M . Wellman and Stephen D . Berkowitz . New York : Cambridge University Press . White , Harrison C . , Scott A . Boorman , and Ronald L . Breiger . 1976 . “Social Structure Middle - Status Conformity 429 from Multiple Networks , I : Blockmodels of Roles and Positions . ” American Journal of Sociology 81 : 730 – 80 . White , Harrison C . , and Robert G . Eccles . 1987 . “Producers’ Markets . ” Pp . 984 – 86 in The New Palgrave : A Dictionary of Economics , edited by John Eatwell , Murray Milgate , and Peter Newman . New York : Stockton Press . Whyte , William H . 1956 . The Organization Man . New York : Simon & Schuster . Winship , Christopher , and Michael Mandel . 1983 . “Roles and Positions : A Critique and Extension of the Blockmodeling Approach . ” Sociological Methodology 14 : 314 – 44 . Wrong , Dennis H . 1961 . “The Oversocialized Conception of Man in Modern Sociology . ” American Sociological Review 26 : 183 – 93 . Zuckerman , Ezra W . 1997 . Mediating the Corporate Product : Securities Analysts and the Scope of the Firm . Dissertation . University of Chicago , Department of Sociology . ——— . 1999 . “The Categorical Imperative : Securities Analysts and the Illegitimacy Discount . ” American Journal of Sociology 104 : 1398 – 1438 . ——— . 2000 . “Focusing the Corporate Product : Securities Analysts and De - Diversiﬁcation . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 45 : 591 – 619 . Zwiebel , Jeffrey . 1995 . “Corporate Conservatism and Relative Compensation . ” Journal of Political Economy 103 : 1 – 25 .