IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN - MACHINE SYSTEMS , VOL . 47 , NO . 6 , DECEMBER 2017 801 A System to Analyze Group Socializing Behaviors in Social Parties Hyukjae Jang , Sungwon P . Choe , Simon N . B . Gunkel , Seungwoo Kang , Member , IEEE , and Junehwa Song , Member , IEEE Abstract —Social events such as networking parties are excellent opportunities to expand one’s social network and make new so - cial ties , as well as simply have fun and enjoy oneself . With the emergence of pervasive technology , we now have the opportunity to discover face - to - face socializing behaviors of individual guests and support them in their socializing goals . Quantitative measures of socializing behaviors will be useful in diverse applications from social therapy to social event management . We propose a system that detects and analyzes group - level socializing behaviors to sup - port real - time and ex post facto social applications deployed in real social event situations . In our approach , we exploit attendees’ characteristics of socializing such as proximity and body orienta - tion to determine social proximity among guests and subsequently detect socializing groups . We performed preliminary studies and multiple deployments of our system and example applications in real social networking parties . Evaluation shows the system can detect socializing groups accurately and support applications that satisfy the interests of guests and party hosts . Index Terms —Context - aware services , networking party , social interaction , socializing behavior , ubiquitous computing . I . I NTRODUCTION S OCIAL events such as networking parties are excellent opportunities to expand one’s social network and make new social ties . This has been shown to have many long - lasting career and even romantic beneﬁts [ 9 ] . As parties , these events are also a welcome break from the daily life stress of urban life Manuscript received January 4 , 2016 ; revised June 15 , 2016 , September 2 , 2016 , and October 24 , 2016 ; accepted October 31 , 2016 . Date of publication December 23 , 2016 ; date of current version November 13 , 2017 . This work was supported in part by the New Professor Research Program of KOREATECH ( 2015 ) and in part by the National Research Foundation of Korea ( NRF ) grant funded by the Korea government ( MSIP ) ( No . NRF - 2016R1E1A2A01939772 ) and the Ministry of Education ( No . NRF - 2016R1D1A1B03930311 ) . This pa - per was recommended by Associate Editor Z . Yu . ( Corresponding author : Seungwoo Kang . ) H . Jang was with the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology ( KAIST ) , Daejeon 34141 , South Korea . He is now with the LINE Plus Corpo - ration , Seongnam - si , 463 - 824 , South Korea ( e - mail : hyukjae . j @ gmail . com ) . S . P . Choe is with UPMC Enterprise Development Services , Pittsburgh , PA 15203 USA ( e - mail : sungwon . peter . choe @ gmail . com ) . S . N . B . Gunkel is with the Distributed and Interactive Systems Group , Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica , 1098 XG Amsterdam , The Netherlands ( e - mail : gunkel @ cwi . nl ) . S . Kang is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering , KOREA TECH , Cheonan 31253 , South Korea ( e - mail : swkang @ koreatech . ac . kr ) . J . Song is with the School of Computing , Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology ( KAIST ) , Daejeon 34141 , South Korea ( e - mail : junesong @ nclab . kaist . ac . kr ) . Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online at http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org . Digital Object Identiﬁer 10 . 1109 / THMS . 2016 . 2634918 for many young professionals and students . They can be quite fun due to the dynamic socializing , the festive atmosphere , the music , food and alcohol , and special games or events . Socializing is the primary and essential activity of social parties . Party guests want to meet new people and strengthen existing ties as well as to simply have fun and enjoy themselves . To make a party successful ﬁnancially and to achieve event - speciﬁc goals , party hosts want to encourage guests to have many positive interactions during a party . In this paper , we propose a social crowd analytics system that detects and quantitatively analyzes socializing behaviors of guests to support successful socializing in networking parties . Quantitative measures of socializing behaviors by the proposed system can enable diverse applications from those that support attendees in their socializing efforts to applications that help event organizers hold and design more sociable and successful events and even applications for sociological analysis . Among the challenges in analyzing socializing behaviors , the most fundamental is to distinguish the members of differ - ent socializing groups from among all the current attendees at a crowded and noisy social event . The socializing occurs not just in individual interactions , but more often in a number of small but highly interacting groups that spontaneously form and dynamically evolve . Within this shifting tapestry of complex social groupings , guests express different socializing behavior and social skills : one guest stands in a corner clutching his glass , hesitant to approach people he does not know ; a group of three by the wine table gets deeply involved in a long interaction . Fur - ther complicating the problem of designing an accurate group sensing approach is that real - world conditions impose a number of practical limitations on the sensing modality used including attendee acceptability and wearability . In our approach , we focus particularly on group - level social - izing behavior , e . g . , attendees joining or leaving groups , how long an attendee stays in a group , who the other group members are , and so forth . To detect and monitor socializing groups , we employ the concept of social proximity , a proximity that con - siders not only the distance between people , but also relative orientation toward or away from nearby people . Based on the social proximity , we derive socializing groups using well - known clustering techniques adapted considering our deployment en - vironment . From the details of socializing groups , we compare relative differences in the attendees’ grouping behaviors reveal - ing interesting details about social attitudes and social skills to support social event applications , e . g . , “longer , steady partici - 2168 - 2291 © 2016 IEEE . Personal use is permitted , but republication / redistribution requires IEEE permission . See http : / / www . ieee . org / publications standards / publications / rights / index . html for more information . 802 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN - MACHINE SYSTEMS , VOL . 47 , NO . 6 , DECEMBER 2017 pation in a group , ” “frequent changes in groups , ” or “mostly in groups with many members . ” Most previous works focused on detecting interactions with friends , family , and co - workers in daily life situations such as on campus , in the workplace , or at home [ 1 ] , [ 23 ] , [ 32 ] , [ 45 ] . We focus instead on a speciﬁc type of social interaction , in - tense interactions among unacquainted people in order to ex - pand their social networks . This allows us to deeply investigate characteristics of socializing behavior itself rather than ana - lyzing structural characteristics of social networks [ 10 ] , [ 32 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 43 ] . Although some of the previously proposed hardware platforms and applications have targeted social events like con - ference scenarios , they mainly focus on augmenting events , for example , providing additional information about events or in - dividuals’ proﬁles [ 2 ] , [ 27 ] , [ 29 ] , rather than measuring and supporting the socializing behavior of attendees itself . This paper makes three main contributions . 1 ) We propose a system to analyze socializing behaviors and provide grouping metrics to support both real - time and ex post facto social applications deployed in real social event situations such as networking parties . 2 ) We present the system architecture and our solution ap - proach to detecting socializing groups based on social proximity and realize the system . 3 ) We present evaluation results to show that our system can accurately detect socializing groups and support example applications through real - world deployment in a series of parties . The rest of the paper is organized as follows . In Section II , we present related work and discuss the differences and our con - tributions . In Section III , we present our preliminary study to motivate socializing behavior monitoring in networking parties . We discuss the proposed approach for socializing group moni - toring in Section IV and describe our system in Section V and its implementation and evaluation in Section VI . We present our experiences from real - world application deployments in Section VII . We provide a discussion of the limitations of the current work and issues for further study in Section VIII . Finally , we conclude the paper in Section IX . II . R ELATED W ORK Related works can be broadly classiﬁed into three categories . The ﬁrst , investigating social event situations such as confer - ences , focuses on augmenting the event , supporting users with additional information , or assistive applications to match atten - dees based on interests . The second supports data collection of social behaviors or interaction among members of small group meetings . The third collects social interaction data from daily life situations and infers the social network of relationships ex post facto . Many of these further investigate correlations be - tween social relationships and outcomes such as catching a cold or political opinions [ 24 ] , [ 25 ] . A . Social Event Situations Several works have supported academic conferences using pervasive technologies speciﬁcally for providing additional pro - ﬁle information about other attendees [ 27 ] , providing location information and social introduction services [ 16 ] , [ 29 ] , and ex - plore the relation between users’ physical proximity and the connecting properties of their social links [ 44 ] . These works do not investigate challenges on the fundamental objective of a so - cial event , mainly focusing instead on providing supplementary information related to social situations . Recently , a novel approach has been proposed to allow event hosts to effectively discover the most inﬂuential and desirable participants to invite to an event [ 46 ] . While it does not address socializing behaviors during a social event , we believe that this work and ours are complementary and thus could be used to build a comprehensive application supporting social event hosts . B . Social Monitoring Systems and Applications to Support Socializing There are many applications and systems similar to ours that attempt to detect social interaction and collect social behavior data . SociableSense [ 20 ] is a system designed for social sci - entists that captures social behavior . Social fMRI [ 1 ] is a data collection platform for interactions among family and friends . Similarly , supporting interactions in small group meetings has also been investigated by providing a room - shaped information environment [ 15 ] , real - time feedback to participants about their participation behavior in meeting conversations [ 40 ] , and re - lating small group performance with interaction behavior [ 11 ] . Most of these works also mainly focus on daily life situations or small size meeting situations and thus do not investigate the unique characteristics of social networking parties , i . e . , social - izing and networking behaviors in more dynamic and crowded environments . Some applications have also been designed to support social - izing . Many of these use artifacts such as a tabletop interface [ 26 ] , or public display [ 27 ] to encourage individuals to social - ize . In our applications , we utilize socializing itself to support interaction . Eagle and Pentland [ 13 ] uses Bluetooth proximity data in order to introduce encounters using social networking services such as Facebook . However , this application does not support face - to - face socializing as our applications do . C . Social Network Analysis in f2f Interaction Until now there have been many works that use the results of social interaction detection . Most of these works investigate daily life situations like the home or workplace over long peri - ods of time ( e . g . , months ) . These works can be broadly divided into those focusing on detecting the interaction itself and oth - ers on inferring social networks of users . Both utilize diverse modalities such as Bluetooth [ 10 ] , [ 28 ] , infrared ( IR ) [ 32 ] , [ 16 ] , speech [ 43 ] , video [ 3 ] , and online social networks [ 4 ] , [ 39 ] . Works in social computing and reality mining have also of - ten investigated daily life social interaction in diverse areas by correlating social interaction behaviors with various measures including ﬁnancial status [ 33 ] , mental and physical well - being [ 36 ] , medical indicators [ 22 ] , [ 25 ] , political opinion [ 24 ] , and group performance [ 31 ] , [ 30 ] . As opposed to the speciﬁc social events that we focus on , in daily life interactions may occur throughout the day in different locations , i . e . , all interactions do not take place in the same JANG et al . : SYSTEM TO ANALYZE GROUP SOCIALIZING BEHAVIORS IN SOCIAL PARTIES 803 Fig . 1 . Example socializing groups at a networking party . situation . Furthermore , much data must be collected among many people over long periods of time ( e . g . , weeks or months ) in order to compare and extract signiﬁcant social network details . Interactions over subgroups do not exist as they do in a social networking party because the interacting social group is often pre - given based on the presence of nearby people . Thus , these works mostly take the viewpoint of analyzing interactions from a dyadic rather than group perspective . III . P RELIMINARY O BSERVATION OF N ETWORKING P ARTIES To better understand social event situations and socializing behaviors , we performed a preliminary investigation in collab - oration with a local monthly networking wine party at three consecutive parties in early 2011 . We used ethnographic meth - ods , including direct observation , video recording , and inter - views with stakeholders such as hosts and guests . Guests were notiﬁed when registering for the party that they would be video - taped for research purposes . About 30 to 40 guests attended each party , including many local business owners , professionals , and graduate students . The parties were held in two different venues in the same neighborhood , one a cocktail lounge and the other a jazz cafe ( see Fig . 1 ) . A . Networking Party Environment Networking parties are very dynamic and crowded social situations ; party hosts will choose a venue size that they expect they can ﬁll near capacity as a crowded party is perceived by guests to be more successful . Thus , most successful parties are crowded at their peak and guests are in close physical proximity to each other . The conversations competing with the music make the parties quite noisy . We observed that networking parties occupy a unique space between public and private life . The conﬁned space and party membership requirements ( restricted by invitation , social ties or simply entrance fee ) creates a loose sense of community among party guests , allowing guests more freedom in behavior as opposed to public locations with unrestricted access such as a crowded train station . However , neither do parties offer the strict privacy of a personal home or room . Party guests are quite conscious that their actions and interactions are visible to others . As such , party guests may be more receptive of pervasive technologies that monitor their interactions at the party than in the many private spaces in normal daily life . B . Socializing Behaviors in Networking Parties The most evident characteristic about socializing at parties that we observed was that socializing occurred at the group level , rather than one - to - one interaction . We deﬁne such groups , whose members express some afﬁliation at the social interaction level according to their relative physical closeness and mutual attention toward each other , as socializing groups . Our con - ception of the socializing group is similar to an F - formation in proxemics terminology [ 7 ] . The socializing groups dynamically form , dissolve , and evolve as members join and leave . For exam - ple , one group of four started with a conversation that involved all the members’ attention , but then spontaneously split into two conversations . A joke from one of the members brought the at - tention back to the larger group , before quickly resplitting into two separate conversations . By observing this grouping behavior , we can identify various socializing behaviors . Some individuals , namely social butter - ﬂies , hop from group to group artfully , spending enough time in each group to have a meaningful interaction . Some guests , however , spend a disproportionate amount of time in only 1 or 2 groups , namely deep talkers . Also , there are some guests who have not socialized in a group for a signiﬁcant duration of time , wallﬂowers . C . Needs of Stakeholders in Social Networking Parties Party hosts are interested ﬁrst in making the party success - ful ﬁnancially and second , in achieving event - speciﬁc objec - tives or goals . Speciﬁcally , the party we collaborated with was a social networking party . The hosts wanted the party to be successful in its function , i . e . , they wanted people to network , forming new and strengthening old social ties . This is because the more successful the party is as a networking event , the more guests who are interested in networking will attend , helping to ensure the long - term ﬁnancial success of the party . From the viewpoint of party guests , they usually have two main motivations for attending a networking party and socializ - ing according to our questionnaire results and interviews . The ﬁrst is to network , meeting new people ( mean = 4 . 56 , SD = 0 . 62 from ﬁve - point Likert scale questionnaires with 18 partic - ipants of one networking party ) and strengthening existing ties ( mean = 4 . 28 , SD = 1 . 02 ) and , the second is to simply have fun and enjoy themselves ( mean = 4 . 78 , SD = 0 . 43 ) . IV . S OCIALIZING G ROUP B EHAVIOR M ONITORING A . Application Examples To meet the needs of successful networking parties , we sug - gest a range of applications for both party guests and hosts . A party review service : This application assists guests in easily keeping in touch with each other after the party , helping to ensure they enjoy the long - term beneﬁts of networking . It presents guests with a list of the top guests and social groups with which they have spent the most time in face - to - face interactions at the party . A real - time in - party ambient game : This application utilizes fun and friendly competition to meet clear socializing behavioral 804 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN - MACHINE SYSTEMS , VOL . 47 , NO . 6 , DECEMBER 2017 goals encouraging party guests towards effective networking . It utilizes socializing behavior itself as the game input medium , thus enhancing instead of disturbing socializing behavior and allowing the guests to begin playing no matter when they arrive at the party . A wallﬂower ﬁnder : This is an assistive application for party hosts . It helps them detect wallﬂowers in real - time more easily , alerting them of wallﬂowers that they would have otherwise missed in the course of their hosting responsibilities . B . Socializing Group Monitoring In order to support the aforementioned applications , it is es - sential to effectively detect socializing groups and analyze the socializing behaviors of people in the groups . As mentioned , a socializing group may consist of simultaneous conversations that can easily merge or split into new conversations . We con - sider socializing groups as a ﬁrst step to understand socializing behavior which can be then further elucidated with conversation - level information . However , detection at the conversation group alone may not be able to provide sufﬁcient information to ana - lyze the behaviors of people in a group . While members in a socializing group could exhibit differ - ent levels of social engagement within the group , e . g . , actively conversing or mainly listening , they still indicate at least a low level of social interaction or afﬁliation with the other group members . As group members , they have the opportunity to in - teract with other members easily . Moreover , there are signiﬁcant differences in the behavior of joining a new group . At the conver - sation level , a guest could simply shift her attention to another member of her socializing group to begin a new conversation . At the socializing group - level , however , the guest would have to leave her current group , and then move to and approach a new group . This is much more visible and public behavior . Thus , we need to observe people at the more fundamental socializing group level to effectively analyze the socializing behaviors of people . Recently , researchers have put much effort into automatically detecting user groups , recommending relevant user groups , and recognizing group behaviors , to name a few [ 48 ] – [ 50 ] . A method for dynamic group structure recognition has been proposed in [ 48 ] . It recognizes the leader – follower and left – right relation - ships of people moving in a group by utilizing mobile - sensing techniques . Since it focuses on moving groups , it is difﬁcult to apply the method directly to our target environment where peo - ple are usually standing while having face - to - face conversation . V . S OCIAL C ROWD A NALYTICS S YSTEM A . System Architecture Overview We present an overview of the proposed social crowd ana - lytics system that monitors and analyzes socializing behaviors in networking parties . Fig . 2 shows the overall system archi - tecture including sensor badges , radio receivers , an interaction analytics server , a visualization server , and applications . Party attendees wear a sensor badges and these badges are used to detect social proximity based on radio signal strength . The ana - Fig . 2 . System architecture of the social crowd analytics system . lytics server collects and analyzes radio signals from the badges to detect socializing groups and provide diverse socializing be - havior information about the party attendees . The visualization server provides applications with analysis results generated by the analytics server . The key component of the system is the interaction analyt - ics server consisting of the social proximity detector , socializ - ing group detector , group - level interaction analyzer , database , and application interface . The social proximity detector col - lects social proximity information from the badges via multiple radio receivers ( see Section V - B ) . The socializing group de - tector analyzes collected social proximity information and per - forms the socializing group detection process continuously ( see Section V - C ) . The generated socializing group information re - veals group - level socializing behaviors of party attendees . This is further processed by the group - level interaction analyzer to provide diverse social interaction metrics useful to diverse ap - plications supporting party hosts and guests ( see Section V - D ) . The application interface provides the data to relevant applica - tions , e . g . , a party review service and an in - party ambient game . The database stores detected group information and derived in - teraction metrics . In the following subsections , we present the details of three major functionalities : social proximity sensing , socializing group detection , and group - level social interaction metrics . B . Social Proximity Sensing Physical proximity is an intuitive way to identify socializing groups since group members must stand close enough to interact and converse with each other ( see Fig . 1 ) . Usually , members in a group are engaged in mutual attention ; they face inward , oriented toward each other and maintain a minimum of space required for all the members to see each other and interact comfortably . However , as noted above , the venue can be quite crowded near the peak times of the party . In this case , members of different groups can become so close to each other that their backs may be nearly touching . Thus , physical proximity alone is not enough to distinguish socializing groups . To address the problem , we include the relative orientation of individuals . Accordingly , we deﬁne social proximity based JANG et al . : SYSTEM TO ANALYZE GROUP SOCIALIZING BEHAVIORS IN SOCIAL PARTIES 805 on physical proximity and further consider relative orientation toward or away from nearby attendees . Socializing groups are determined based on the social proximity of guests . Even if two individual guests are physically close , if they are not also oriented toward each other , then they are not considered to be in the same socializing group . A recent work [ 47 ] introduces the concept of social intimacy between users to form a group for opportunistic activity recom - mendation . They deﬁne static and dynamic intimacy to support two different types of group formation . However , it utilizes on - line social interaction data , e . g . , comments , likes , and friend lists , to calculate social intimacy . Our social proximity is differ - ent from social intimacy in that it represents in situ proximity among users in face - to - face interaction . In the following , we discuss alternatives for social proximity sensing and present our approach . 1 ) Limitations of Existing Approaches : A variety of ap - proaches can be considered to detect social proximity . Potential approaches include Infrared beacons [ 16 ] , [ 32 ] , Bluetooth scan - ning [ 10 ] , audio or speech [ 42 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 41 ] , and video [ 2 ] . These methods can measure distances or proximity among people or detect common audio signals to determine whether they partic - ipate in the same conversation . They often have practical limi - tations in sensing social proximity to detect socializing groups in party environments . First , specialized hardware like IR sensors are not as yet widely available for commercial deployment . More importantly , at parties guests are not always facing each other within the an - gular range required for detecting an IR signal . We observed many conversing guests sitting side by side on couches facing the same direction or standing side by side on the veranda . In ad - dition , guests’ natural behaviors , e . g . , holding a wine glass , can easily block the IR signal , which results in reducing detection reliability . Second , Bluetooth scanning is often used for inferring daily life social interactions by detecting potential co - location among people . However , it does not have ﬁne enough space and time resolutions to capture socializing groups . A Bluetooth scan in a venue would detect the large majority of devices rather than the current socializing group of 2 to 8 or so members . Third , audio - based techniques might have similar resolution difﬁculties , especially in a crowded party situation where guests in different socializing groups are pressed up close to each other back to back . It is challenging to identify socializing groups accurately due to the complexity of distinguishing many nearby voices competing with the noise of other conversations and the background music . Even if the technical challenges could be satisfyingly addressed , audio - based techniques have an in - herent privacy issue . Reports in the literature indicated that audio recording has very low acceptability among users even when using a privacy preserving technique [ 21 ] . During our preliminary study , party hosts expressed concerns about au - dio recording in particular , stating that it could have a nega - tive effect on party guests’ enjoyment and attendance of the party . 2 ) Our Approach—Social Proximity Sensing With RSSI : Considering our deployment environment and user concerns , we Fig . 3 . RSSI measurements from dyads facing each other and facing away from each other . develop an approach exploiting RSSI ( radio signal strength indi - cation ) of RF ( radio frequency ) signal . We note that the human body can cause huge signal strength attenuation when blocking a radio signal . Thus , if guests wear forward - facing radio devices and interacting group members face relatively inward toward each other , the RSSI value among socializing members is likely to be stronger than among nonmembers at similar distances . Fig . 3 presents the result of RSSI measurements when two people face each other and face away from each other , respectively , showing clear differentiation between the two conditions . Note that our goal is not to measure the precise physical distance between guests , but to estimate the relative proximity which allows face - to - face interaction in a group . This approach can be robust to potential temporal ﬂuctuation of radio signal strength that might be caused in dynamic party environments . Also , it is tolerable to noisy and dim environments such as networking party venues . To realize the approach , we use Zigbee - enabled sensor nodes . This approach has several additional advantages . First , it meets the ﬁne time resolution monitoring requirements . Socializing group members can join and leave in a matter of seconds . With RF , the frequency of sampling can be ﬁnetuned to the needs of applications , e . g . , detecting every second . Second , it supports wide orientation coverage in detecting social proximity among party guests . RSSI measurement can cover a wide detection angle of almost 180 ° . This is also efﬁcient for detecting multi - ple members at the same time . Third , the sensor nodes are small enough to be packaged into a comfortable , wearable form factor . Thus , they do not distract or affect guests’ natural socializing behaviors much . Fourth , Zigbee provides an appropriate signal strength level for capturing socializing groups while other avail - able radio methods such as Wi - Fi provide signal strength levels that are too strong . For social proximity data collection , we design an efﬁcient data collection protocol based on message broadcasting . Ba - sically , sensor nodes worn by party participants broadcast a beacon message with their own ID . Upon receiving such broad - casted messages , the nodes measure RSSI values of received messages and build a new message that contains information of sensor node IDs and their current RSSI values . They broadcast the new message again . However , indiscriminate broadcasting 806 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN - MACHINE SYSTEMS , VOL . 47 , NO . 6 , DECEMBER 2017 Fig . 4 . Matrix of RSSI values between guests . can cause scalability issues . Since all sensor nodes share the same RF channel for broadcasting messages and measuring RSSI values , there could be collisions in the Zigbee MAC ( Me - dia Access Control ) layer . In order to minimize potential errors due to poor collision detection support by the sensor nodes , we use a single type of message rather than allowing different types of messages , e . g . , control messages , data messages . Also , to reduce the processing overhead of the sensor nodes , the message is deﬁned to have preallocated slots of sensor IDs and corresponding RSSI values . Currently , we allocate 50 slots , considering the usual number of party attendees . A message includes a 10 - byte header , 50 1 - byte RSSI slots , and two 1 - byte delimiters , and thus , the message packet size is 62 bytes . Thus , the total data rate would be 3100 bytes / s when 50 nodes are active in a party venue . This is much smaller than the maximum data rate of the 2 . 4 GHz Zigbee band , 250 kbit / s . The process involving message broadcasting and RSSI mea - surement is periodically performed during the party . Currently , we set the period to one second . To collect RSSI measurements from the sensor nodes , multiple antennas are deployed in the party venue . They passively receive the messages broadcasted by all the nodes . The analytics server connected to the anten - nas collects and analyzes the messages , and updates a matrix of RSSI values . Fig . 4 shows an example of such RSSI matrix . The brightness of each cell represents the RSSI value ; the darker the cell , the greater the RSSI value , i . e . , the closer the social proximity . For example , the ﬁrst row shows RSSI values seen by sensor node 1 . C . Socializing Group Detection The next step for socializing behavior monitoring in net - working parties is to detect socializing groups . The socializing group detection process involves three major steps : preprocess - ing , clustering , and post - processing . First , the preprocessing step ﬁlters out errors from the collected RSSI values and per - forms initial aggregation . RSSI values that deviatefrom anormal value range are removed , and then average values are computed with a preclustering buffer . The buffer size can be set as a system parameter . Second , the clustering step forms the initial socializing groups . We intuited that ﬁnding groups from social proximities can be derived from the well - known two - dimensional clustering problem . Accordingly , we adopt existing clustering algorithms and investigate their performance . By applying a clustering al - gorithm over the preprocessed data , clustering results are peri - odically obtained . Third , the post - processing step improves the quality of group - ing results by identifying groups relevant to practically mean - ingful socializing behavior . If a person moves from a group to another group , there can be a number of frequent joins and leaves to / from intermediate groups . Such temporary joins are sorted out . Based on our preliminary observation ( see Section III ) , a person is considered to be in a socializing group only when she stays in the same group for a certain time dura - tion . In order to determine an individuals’ group , we aggregate a sliding window of consecutive clustering results , e . g . , three or ﬁve such snapshots . The decision criteria is as follows . If a person belongs to the same cluster in more than 70 % of these clustering results , her group is determined to be that cluster . If a person belongs to multiple clusters and no one cluster occurs in more than 30 % of the clustering results , she does not belong to any group , i . e . , she is considered to be just passing by . If there are multiple clusters that occur more than 30 % of the time but less than 70 % , one’s group is determined as the cluster to which she belongs the most frequently . One important issue is how to determine the relevant param - eters for effective group detection . Here we have three param - eters , the preclustering buffer size , the clustering period , and the postclustering aggregation window . It is important to deter - mine appropriate parameter values that yield the most accurate group detection results , robust to erroneous measurement . For example , if the buffer size is too large or the clustering period is too long , the results might not be accurate enough to capture the change in groups . To determine the appropriate values , we conduct an empirical study , which is discussed in the evaluation section . Another important issue is to determine the clustering model . For the clustering step , we selected three representative clus - tering models . To adapt them for a networking party situation , we further consider the issues in deriving socializing groups in each clustering model . First , the exact number of socializ - ing groups is not given . Second , we only have social proximity values between each attendee to work with . Thus , it is hard to estimate the geometrical position of each actual attendee with regards to others . We present below the three clustering models considering such issues . Using connectivity models , like spectral clustering techniques [ 19 ] , we consider attendees and their social proximities as a net - work graph where each node represents an attendee and the weight of each edge is given by the social proximity between JANG et al . : SYSTEM TO ANALYZE GROUP SOCIALIZING BEHAVIORS IN SOCIAL PARTIES 807 attendees . Thus , ﬁnding socializing groups based on social prox - imities can be reduced to the well - known minimum cut prob - lem in graph theory . The spectral clustering algorithm ﬁnds the minimum weight cuts in the graph by using a linear algebraic eigenvalue decomposition technique . The minimum cuts parti - tion attendees into socializing groups . For centroid models such as the K - means clustering algo - rithm , we partition the given set of nodes into k clusters by randomly selecting k centroids and assigning each node to the centroid with the nearest mean . We modify the K - means algo - rithm according to our environment based on [ 12 ] by determin - ing k in proportion to the total number of current attendees . In addition , since we have only social proximity values between attendees , we set the positions of centroids to be selected among the individual attendees . With density models , e . g . , density - based clustering [ 8 ] , we deﬁne clusters as a higher density area as compared to other areas , connecting nodes into a cluster that are within a certain distance threshold satisfying the density criterion . Density is an intuitive way for ﬁnding proximity groups . To construct the proximity groups , the ε ( eps ) – neighborhood radius must be decided . We take an analytical approach to estimate the neigh - borhood radius for density - based clustering [ 53 ] . We empirically analyzed the performance of the clustering algorithms , discussed in the evaluation section . D . Group - Level Social Interaction Analysis After obtaining socializing groups , we extract basic grouping metrics . The basic metrics concern what groups attendees par - ticipated in and for how long , i . e . , duration of participation in a group , group size , or identity of other attendees in the group . From these basic metrics , we further derive many diverse and detailed social grouping metrics about individuals and groups . They include the number of socializing groups participated in for individuals , the number of interactions with male or female guests , the number of interactions without friends , the correla - tion between the duration of participation in a socializing group , and the identity of the group members . Based on the social grouping metrics , we can calculate useful social interaction metrics for a social party application that an - alyzes social behaviors and fosters interactions among guests , e . g . , the “most popular” guests who interacted with other atten - dees most , the two guests who interacted with each other for the longest time . To obtain the most popular n guests , we sum the duration of time spent with each other attendee in each group instance . This is further reﬁned by adjusting the duration of each instance proportionally to the size of the group , reﬂecting the socializing reality that the interaction is not always one - on - one and may involve other group members . Furthermore , the relative analysis of the social grouping met - rics in comparison with other guests’ behaviors within the same event enables situation - speciﬁc understanding of guests’ social - izing characteristics . Because every event is not the same with its size , participants , mood , and so on , even the same value of a speciﬁc social grouping metric can be considered as different behavior . Social interaction metrics obtained from such a rela - TABLE I N UMBER OF P ARTY G UESTS Party # P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 P12 P13 Guests 38 36 43 43 43 37 41 32 45 40 39 33 28 tive analysis include “longer , steady participation in a socializ - ing group , ” “frequent changes in socializing groups , ” “mostly in socializing groups with many members , ” etc . We can then infer speciﬁc socializing behavior type labels from these , such as wallﬂowers and social butterﬂies . VI . I MPLEMENTATION AND E VALUATION A . Implementation We brieﬂy present the prototype implementation of the pro - posed system including the sensor badges , radio receivers , and analytics server . For the badges , we use TinyOS 1 . 1 compatible nodes equipped with 801 . 15 . 4 Zigbee protocol capability . They are 4 cm × 5 cm × 2 cm in size and weigh less than 25 grams . We packaged the sensor nodes in conference - style plastic sleeve badges , worn by party guests around the neck ( see Fig . 1 ) . Thus , when the guests form a group and have face - to - face interactions , the sensors face each other , resulting in higher signal strength . We implemented ﬁrmware in nesC , which is run on the nodes to perform message broadcasting and RSSI measurement . The receivers are also implemented with the same type of node , run - ning nesC ﬁrmware to receive and forward broadcast messages ; they are equipped with external antennas to improve the recep - tion of radio signals . They forward the collected messages to the analytics server via Bluetooth . The server is implemented on a Windows 7 PC . The server components are implemented in C # . For clustering algorithms , the connectivity model is imple - mented based on the Weka tool [ 51 ] . We implemented centroid and density models referring to [ 52 ] and [ 53 ] , respectively . 1 ) User Experiences Using the System : We deployed our system at subsequent parties of the same monthly event as in the preliminary study in order to monitor the grouping interactions and apply our applications . Table I shows the number of guests at the parties where we deployed our system . Fig . 5 shows the variation of socializing group size for each guest over the period of one party ( P9 ) . During the deployment period , we examined the acceptability of the system and obtained feedback about user experiences . Initially , one of the major concerns with monitoring socializ - ing behaviors was whether the participants’ natural interaction behavior was signiﬁcantly affected . Thus , we performed in - terviews with the party guests to ask if they were concerned about wearing the sensors and being monitored . Most guests reported that they usually even forgot that they were wearing the monitoring devices . We observed that the biggest concern to them was not that they were being monitored but rather in the sensing modality of the monitoring . One interviewee remarked : “ If you would record . . . sound then it would be a much big - ger problem . ” Once we assured them the sensor badge did not 808 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN - MACHINE SYSTEMS , VOL . 47 , NO . 6 , DECEMBER 2017 Fig . 5 . Socializing group size varying over the period of one party . The color indicates the size of the group to which each guest belonged at the speciﬁed time ; the darker the color , the larger the group size . record any sound , they willingly wore it and participated in our experiments . B . Evaluation Setup We evaluate the proposed system in terms of the group detec - tion accuracy and the system cost . The most important feature of the system is detecting socializing groups in real time . We test each of the clustering models in real social event settings to determine the suitability of the methods for ﬁnding socializing groups . We also investigate the effect of parameter selection . During the deployment period , we collected RSSI - based proximity data for 4 – 5 h at each party and used the data for experimental analysis and to perform group detection with the system . We selected the last two parties , i . e . , P12 and P13 , for the evaluation since the system was stabilized and well tuned after repeated deployment tests , and thus , the data collected at those parties were relatively more reliable compared to those from the initial parties . We established ground truth for socializing groups by using video recordings . The ground truth results were manually anno - tated from all four angles of the two parties’ video recordings . The total length of video recordings of one party was almost 20 h . The annotations include snapshots of the groups and their members identiﬁed every 10 s . As an evaluation metric for the group detection accuracy , we use the Rand index [ 38 ] . It is a measure of the similarity between two data clustering results and mathematically equivalent to accuracy . We compare group detection results derived by the system with the ground truth results . To make a comparison , we check the timestamp of the group detection results by our system and select the ground truth group result which is the closest to it . As mentioned , there are three parameters to be adjusted for the socializing group detection process : the preclustering buffer size , the clustering period , and the postclustering aggregation window . For comparison with the ground truth annotated in 10 s periods , we select a few sets of parameter values for the clustering period and the aggregation window to generate group Fig . 6 . Socializinggroupdetectionaccuracydependingonclusteringmethods ( a ) P12 ( b ) P13 . detection results with a similar period , every 10 s . They include four sets , namely 1Clu _ 10Aggr , 2Clu _ 5Aggr , 3Clu _ 3Aggr , and 10Clu . For example , 1Clu _ 10Aggr means that the clustering is performed every 1 s and 10 clustering results are aggregated to generate the ﬁnal socializing groups . 10Clu means that the clustering is performed every 10 s and the generated clusters are considered as socializing groups . We use 3Clu _ 3Aggr as a default setting . C . Evaluation Result 1 ) Group Detection Accuracy With Clustering Methods : We examine the group detection accuracy depending on the clus - tering model applied for group detection . We use a default setting for the clustering period and the aggregation window , 3Clu _ 3Aggr . We vary the buffer size from 1 to 15 . Fig . 6 shows the result . Rand index values are mostly higher than 85 % for the centroid model and the connectivity model compared to the ground truth : 86 . 5 % on average for the centroid model and 87 . 8 % on average for the connectivity model . This indicates that both connectivity and centroid models shows the feasibility of detecting socializing groups . However , the results of the density model show quite low performance , 54 . 2 % on average . The density model’s weakness is that it is not as adaptable as the other models . This is because each socializing group can have a different density . Guests on the veranda or on the couch could be standing or sitting quite close together , whereas guests inside the main venue area could be interacting around a wine table at a greater distance from each other . These kinds of different situations occur often simultaneously in a social event , but cannot be easily handled with a density - based method , because density models use a single density parameter for all the socializing groupings . Note that the connectivity and centroid models show better performance than the density model in terms of the sensitivity to the buffer size . For the given clustering period and the aggre - gation window , 3 s , they do not show signiﬁcant changes with the buffer size while the density model’s accuracy decreases noticeably as the buffer size increases . This is because , as the buffer size increases , the variance of social proximity values de - screase . Because the density model uses a single threshold value for grouping , there could be more errors since as input variance decreases , more social proximity values would be close to that threshold and included in the cluster . JANG et al . : SYSTEM TO ANALYZE GROUP SOCIALIZING BEHAVIORS IN SOCIAL PARTIES 809 Fig . 7 . Rand Index varying over the duration of party P12 ( data points are plotted every 10 seconds ) . Fig . 8 . Average Rand Index depending on the number of guests ( P12 data ) . 2 ) Group Detection Accuracy Variation Over Time : We in - vestigate how the accuracy varies over time since the number of guests in a party venue varies as they come and go . Fig . 7 shows time - varying Rand index values obtained with the P12 party data . We use the two clustering models , the centroid and the connectivity . Both of them show similarly high accuracy , i . e . , 80 % – 95 % most of the time while the centroid model shows relatively less ﬂuctuations . An interesting result is that the Rand index is low at the beginning and the end of the party . We conjecture that this is due to the relatively small number of guests at those times . In Fig . 8 , we analyze the average Rand index values depending on the number of guests . As aforementioned , when the number is small , e . g . , less than 10 , the average Rand index is less than 80 % for most cases . However , when the number of guests reaches 20 , it becomes almost 90 % . RSSI - based computation of social proximity is one of the reasons why the accuracy is relatively low when the number of guests is small . When the number of guests in a venue is sparse , the RSSI value of a guest who is facing a group could place her in that group even though she is herself not in that group . 3 ) Effect of System Parameter Selection : We examine the ef - fect of system parameter selection on group detection accuracy . We test the four sets of parameter values previously introduced . We vary the buffer size from 1 to 15 . For group detection , we use the connectivity model which shows high accuracy and use the P12 and P13 data . Fig . 9 shows the results . The 3Clu _ 3Aggr case shows the best performance , about 88 % on average when the buffer size is 3 . Note that the other cases also show comparable results depending on the buffer size applied . When the size is too small , e . g . , one , it is difﬁcult to diminish the effect of noise or errors in the RSSI - based social proximity values , which are the input for Fig . 9 . Socializing group detection accuracy for different parameters ( a ) P12 and ( b ) P13 . the clustering algorithm . When the size is too large , e . g . , 15 , the social proximity data could be outdated , not quickly reﬂecting changes . Thus , in general , we see the best performance when the buffer size is close to the given clustering period . 4 ) Packet Drop Rate : We use the radio signal strength of wireless sensor nodes to compute social proximity for social - izing group detection . Wireless packet dropping could affect the performance of the group detection process . Several issues such as MAC layer collision and sensor malfunction could cause packet drop . We investigate how many packet drops occurred during deployment at the parties . We use the sensor data col - lected from the last 6 parties ( P8 to P13 ) . The average packet drop rate is 13 . 4 % ( 10 . 5 % – 15 . 9 % ) . To examine the effect of the number of guests , we analyzed the data but could not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant correlation between the drop rate and the number of guests . This is because the number of guests is not great enough to cause a problem . As mentioned , the current message format design and message exchange protocol are efﬁcient enough to support the usual number of guests at the parties where we conducted the deployment study . We further investigated how the packet drop occurred among party guests . There could be two cases where packet drop se - riously degrades group detection performance . The ﬁrst is if consecutive packets only from some speciﬁc guests are dropped for a long time , e . g . , several minutes . The second is if the pack - ets from many guests are simultaneously dropped at speciﬁc time points . From our analysis , we could not ﬁnd such cases ; the packet drop occurrences were randomly distributed among all guests over the duration of the party . 5 ) System Cost : We consider a mobile system deployment in order to support speciﬁc stakeholder requirements for social events . Different stakeholders might have different requirements 810 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN - MACHINE SYSTEMS , VOL . 47 , NO . 6 , DECEMBER 2017 Fig . 10 . Processing time taken to generate the socializing group results by each clustering model adopted in the system ( data from P9 ) . Fig . 11 . Power consumption of each clustering model depending on the num - ber of guests ( data from P9 ) . for their applications and their hardware availability . For exam - ple , a host running a real - time wallﬂower - detecting application might use a smartphone implementation in a venue where no server PC is available . Thus , we evaluate the performance in terms of processing time and energy consumption . For the eval - uation , we replayed collected data from one party , P9 . We used a Google Nexus One with QSD 8250 1 GHz CPU , 512 MB RAM to perform the group detection process . We selected it to investigate performance when using a low spec device . Fig . 10 shows the processing time taken to generate the so - cializing group results . As one might expect , the processing time is inﬂuenced by the number of guests , at least for the con - nectivity and centroid models . The connectivity model has the highest processing cost followed by the centroid model , while density - based clustering is the most efﬁcient . When the num - ber of guests is around 45 , the connectivity model takes a little over 200 ms to process the data . We believe this is acceptable considering the relatively low CPU power . Fig . 11 shows the power consumption of each clustering model across the number of guests . Density and centroid models show low power con - sumption compared to the connectivity model . Idle means the power consumed only when receiving data without processing for socializing group detection . From these results , we expect that performing socializing group detection is quite feasible not only in a server environment but in a mobile environment as well . 6 ) Suggestions for Group Detection : The centroid and con - nectivity models both show good performance in terms of group detection accuracy , while that of the density model is poor . Thus , we would not recommend applying the density model as a group detection solution . In terms of processing time and energy cost , the centroid model is superior to the connectivity model while the connectivity model gives slightly better accuracy . One could choose from among these two models considering this tradeoff . For example , if it is an energy - constrained mobile environment , the centroid model might be a better choice . Regarding the pa - rameter selection for group detection , it is necessary to ﬁrst decide on a desirable time period value for generating group de - tection results depending on the target environment or applica - tions . Based on this value , one can then ﬁnd appropriate numbers for the clustering period and aggregation window parameters . We found that we obtained better results when the difference between these two numbers was minimal in our setup . VII . A PPLICATION D EPLOYMENT E XPERIENCE We designed the applications based on requirements derived from the preliminary study : both hosts and guests want guests to not only successfully make and reinforce social connections , but also to enjoy themselves . In this section , we brieﬂy introduce and discuss user experiences with two applications we developed to help support these requirements . A . AmbiAward : Gamiﬁcation of Party Interaction To encourage socializing and make the party more fun in general , we developed an ambient game [ 14 ] for party guests that utilizes socializing interaction itself as the game input medium ( as envisioned in [ 5 ] ) . Traditional games require the coordination and engaged participation of all party guests . In most parties , however , guests come and go at different times , making such coordination difﬁcult . In addition , some guests may not want to participate in such games , preferring to continue to socialize . Since social interaction itself is the game input medium in our ambient game , there is no need to disturb the natural social interaction of the party and guests can participate as soon as they enter the party venue . At the parties where we deployed AmbiAward , we collected social grouping metrics , processed socializing rankings for sev - eral award categories , and announced the results and gave out prizes to guests near the end of the party . The following awards were presented . 1 ) Most popular overall : The guest who socialized the most as determined by both the number and duration of group interactions . We calculate who spent the most time with the most diverse number of groups , weighted by group size . Thus a guest cannot just quickly say “hi” to different groups , but must engage with them . This award encour - ages guests to socialize with many diverse groups and meet new people . 2 ) Most popular man among women and most popular woman among men : The man who socialized the most in groups with a high female - to - male ratio and vice versa . These awards are calculated similarly to the most popular overall except we consider the gender ratio . We found that meeting people of the opposite sex was one of the primary goals for many of our guests . By gamifying this interest , it may support guests by providing an excuse to approach JANG et al . : SYSTEM TO ANALYZE GROUP SOCIALIZING BEHAVIORS IN SOCIAL PARTIES 811 Fig . 12 . AfterParty application screenshot . the opposite sex , helping the guests mitigate the shyness or hesitation in approaching . 3 ) Deepest talkers : The two guests that spent the most time together . We calculate this award based on the total dura - tion of time over all socializing groups where the guests were together . This calculation is further weighted by group size , where smaller groups contribute more to the score . This award thus recognizes that successful social - izing can occur in the form of making a deep connection with another and not just in quantity of interactions . After a party where AmbiAward was deployed , we conducted a ﬁve - point Likert scale questionnaire survey with 18 respon - dents to obtain user experiences . Guests enjoyed AmbiAward ( mean = 4 . 28 , SD = 0 . 96 ) and enjoyed the party more so than previous parties that they attended without AmbiAward ( mean = 3 . 61 , SD = 1 . 45 ) . Regarding if it motivated more interaction , although the overall result was close to neutral ( mean = 3 . 06 , SD = 1 . 30 ) , around 50 % of attendees reported that AmbiAward motivated them to socialize more . B . AfterParty : Reviewing Party Interaction Histories Guests use AfterParty for checking their interaction histories from a recent party and to obtain contact information of atten - dees they interacted with . We deployed AfterParty as a Facebook application ( see Fig . 12 ) . AfterParty provides both individual - and group - level socializ - ing information : the Top 5 individual guests that they interacted with most and the Top Groups , i . e . , the group formations that occurred the most often across all group instances that the guest participated in . The Top 5 and Top Groups results provided con - tact information ( e . g . , Facebook proﬁles and email addresses ) . AmbiAward results are also displayed on the AfterParty proﬁles of award winners . We only provide “top” results because we expected guests would be most interested in keeping in touch with those that they socialized with the most and also assumed that guests would not want their contacts to be provided to other less familiar guests due to privacy concerns . In public social events like parties , there is always the possibility of having in - teractions with individuals that guests would prefer not to have further contact with . We thus enabled rich privacy settings . Users could specify to whom ( e . g . , only those in their Top 5 ) what data would be visible ( e . g . , email address , proﬁle photo ) . After the deployment of AfterParty , we conducted a ﬁve - point Likert scale questionnaire survey with 20 respondents to assess users’ experiences with the application . First , we examined its usefulness . Attendees answered that they found the overall ser - vice provided by the AfterParty application useful ( mean = 3 . 9 , SD = 0 . 62 ) as well as the Top 5 and Top Group results ( mean = 4 . 05 , SD = 1 . 02 ) . In addition , we examined how attendees felt about the appropriateness of the interaction results shown in the application . Most guests felt that the results were accu - rate ( mean = 3 . 95 , SD = 0 . 97 for the Top 5 results and mean = 3 . 85 , SD = 1 . 01 for the Top Groups results ) . Regarding the privacy policies of the application , many guests felt the privacy settings gave them sufﬁcient control over their data ( mean = 3 . 22 , SD = 0 . 85 ) , but this remains an area for improvement ( see Section VIII Discussion ) . VIII . D ISCUSSION The results from our deployment suggest that our system can providemeaningful metrics about attendees’ groupingbehaviors and further that it is possible to infer several typical grouping and socializing behaviors . We discuss the limitations of this study and opportunities for future work . Deeper analysis of social interactions : Our approach gives many beneﬁts to various stakeholders , but it does not cover so - cial signal [ 35 ] or conversation - level details such as speaking duration and turn taking [ 23 ] , speech dominance measures in the conversation group [ 18 ] or the ratio between listening and speaking . We envision that interesting and reﬁned socializing metrics could be derived if we could detect both socializing group behaviors and speaking behaviors . As noted , there exist high barriers to monitoring speaking behavior in public social event situations . However , there may exist some special situa - tions that could leverage this hybrid approach when beneﬁts or incentives for users could outweigh privacy concerns , especially for social therapy , social skill testing [ 17 ] , or speciﬁc sociology experiment situations . Privacy issues : As aforementioned , attendees have a rela - tive open attitude to being observed by others at social events , because attendees go to such public social event situations to be social and to be seen . Nevertheless , we learned from the AfterParty application deployment that attendees have differ - ent opinions about having their behavior recorded and shared with other attendees . Even though privacy controls in After - Party support different levels of sharing interaction information with others , there exists a more complex , as yet unaddressed issue . Such results are not solely dependent on the individual’s privacy information alone but on many guests’ . This issue orig - inates from the fact that multiple attendees participate in the same social proximity group . There is no one clear “owner” 812 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN - MACHINE SYSTEMS , VOL . 47 , NO . 6 , DECEMBER 2017 of the interaction data . Thus , conventional information control approaches cannot solve the issue without impacting the quality of the results . For example , guest A may not want to appear in guest B’s “Top 5” results . If we simply remove A from B’s results , the quality of B’s results will be compromised , resulting in a degradation of the application experience . Addressing such a complicated privacy issue is an important future work . Extension to social science studies : Inspired by emerging works done in collaboration with social scientists [ 37 ] , [ 20 ] , we realize that social scientists may ﬁnd our social grouping metric data of immense practical value . In the past , social sci - entists studying socializing behavior have had to rely on time - consuming analysis of video or audio recordings and subject self - reports . However , in addition to the time cost in analysis of recordings , recordings allow for the possibility of identifying individual subjects , infringing on their privacy and sometimes even legal rights . Furthermore , self - reports are often prone to enhancement bias and lapses in memory [ 34 ] . Thus , social sci - entists could beneﬁt from tools that provide reliable data on socializing behavior for analysis . IX . C ONCLUSION Socializing is the essential activity of social event situations . We observed that socializing at social events like networking parties occurs at the group level . We have observed how one so - cializing group can include multiple conversations with partner - swapping as well as nonverbal interaction . We demonstrated a system that infers social grouping metrics that can be used to derive socializing behavior . We have showed the utility of our system in how it can enable new applications utilizing these metrics that can help us not only detect and understand social - izing behavior better , but also encourage socializing behavior change . A CKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for the valuable comments . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] M . Aharony et al . , “Social fMRI : Investigating and shaping social mecha - nisms in the real world , ” Pervasive Mobile Comput . , vol . 7 , no . 6 , pp . 643 – 659 , Dec . 2011 . [ 2 ] N . Y . Asabere et al . , “Improving smart conference participation through socially aware recommendation , ” IEEE Trans . Human - Mach . Syst . , vol . 44 , no . 5 , pp . 689 – 700 , Oct . 2014 . [ 3 ] X . Bao and R . R . Choudhury , “MoVi : Mobile phone based video high - lights via collaborative sensing , ” in Proc . 8th Int . Conf . Mobile Syst . Appl . Services , 2010 , pp . 357 – 370 . [ 4 ] L . Barkhuus , “Student socialization in the age of facebook , ” in Proc . SIGCHI Conf . Human Factors Comput . Syst . , 2010 , pp . 133 – 142 . [ 5 ] S . P . Choe , H . Jang , and J . Song , “Roleplaying gamiﬁcation to encourage social interactions at parties , ” in Proc . CHI 2011 Workshop Gamiﬁcation Using Game Design Elements NonGame Contexts , 2011 , pp . 26 – 29 . [ 6 ] T . Choudhury and A . Pentland , “Sensing and modeling human networks using the sociometer , ” in Proc . 7th IEEE Int . Symp . Wearable Comput . , 2003 , pp . 216 – 222 . [ 7 ] T . M . Ciolek , “The proxemics lexicon : A ﬁrst approximation , ” J . Nonver - bal Behavior . , vol . 8 , no . 1 , pp . 55 – 79 , 1983 . [ 8 ] G . Cormode , “Conqueringthedivide : Continuousclusteringofdistributed data streams , ” in Proc . 23rd Int . Conf . Data Eng . , 2007 , vol . 2007 , pp . 1036 – 1045 . [ 9 ] W . Davies , “Youdon’tknowmebut . . . Socialcapitalandsocialsoftware , ” The Work Foundation , London , U . K . , 2003 . [ 10 ] T . M . T . Do and D . Gatica - Perez , “Human interaction discovery in smart - phone proximity networks , ” Pers . Ubiquitous Comput . , vol . 17 , pp . 1 – 19 , Dec . 2011 . [ 11 ] W . Dong , B . Lepri , and A . Pentland , “Automatic prediction of small groupperformanceininformationsharingtasks , ”in Proc . Conf . Collective Intell . , Cambridge , MA , USA , pp . 96 – 103 . [ 12 ] R . I . M . Dunbar , N . D . C . Duncan , and D Nettle , “Size and structure of freely forming conversational groups , ” Human Nature , vol . 6 , no . 1 , pp . 67 – 78 , 1995 . [ 13 ] N . Eagle and A . Pentland , “Social Serendipity : Mobilizing social soft - ware , ” IEEE Pervasive Comput . , vol . 4 , no . 2 , pp . 28 – 34 , Jan . – Mar . 2005 . [ 14 ] M . Eyles and R . Eglin , “Ambient games , revealing a route to a world where work is play ? , ” Int . J . Comput . Games Technol . , vol . 2008 , 2008 , Art . no . 7 . [ 15 ] K . Fujita et al . , “Ambient Suite : enhancing communication among mul - tiple participants , ” in Proc . 8th Int . Conf . Adv . Comput . Entertainment Technol . , 2011 , pp . 1 – 8 . [ 16 ] J . Gips and A . Pentland , “Mapping human networks , ” in Proc . 4th Annu . Int . Conf . Pervasive Comput . Commun . , 2006 , pp . 168 – 177 . [ 17 ] M . E . Hoque , M . Courgeon , J . C . Martin , B . Mutlu , and R . W . Picard , “MACH : My automated conversation coach , ” in Proc . Int . Conf . Ubiqui - tous Comput . , 2013 , pp . 697 – 706 . [ 18 ] H . Hung , Y . Huang , G . Friedland , and D Gatica - Perez , “Estimating dom - inance in multi - party meetings using speaker diarization , ” IEEE Trans . Audio , Speech , Lang . Process . , vol . 19 , no . 4 , pp . 847 – 860 , May 2011 . [ 19 ] R . Kannan , S . Vempala , and A . Vetta , “On clusterings : Good , bad and spectral , ” J . ACM . , vol . 51 , no . 3 , pp . 497 – 515 , 2004 [ 20 ] K Kiran et al . , “SociableSense : exploring the trade - offs of adaptive sam - pling and computation ofﬂoading for social sensing , ” in Proc . 17th Annu . Int . Conf . Mobile Comput . Netw . , 2011 , pp . 73 – 84 . [ 21 ] P . Klasnja et al . , “Exploring privacy concerns about personal sensing , ” in Proc . 7th Int . Conf . Pervasive Comput . , 2009 , pp . 176 – 183 . [ 22 ] T . Lee et al . , “Accurate and privacy preserving cough sensing using a low - cost microphone , ” in Proc . 13th Int . Conf . Ubiquitous Comput . , 2011 , pp . 375 – 384 . [ 23 ] Y . Lee et al . , “SocioPhone : everyday face - to - face interaction monitoring platform using multi - phone sensor fusion , ” in Proc . 11th Annu . Int . Conf . Mobile Syst . Appl . Serv . , 2013 , pp . 375 – 388 . [ 24 ] A . Madan et al . , “Pervasive sensing to model political opinions in face - to - face networks , ” in Proc . 9th Int . Conf . Pervasive Comput . , 2011 , pp . 214 – 231 . [ 25 ] A . Madan et al . , “Social sensing for epidemiological behavior change , ” in Proc . 12th ACM Int . Conf . Ubiquitous Comput . , 2010 , pp . 291 – 300 . [ 26 ] A . Marie et al . , “SIDES : A cooperative tabletop computer game for social skills development , ” in Proc . 20th Anniversary Conf . Comput . Supported Cooperative Work , 2006 , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 27 ] J . F . McCarthy etal . , “Augmentingthesocialspaceofanacademicconfer - ence , ” in Proc . ACM Conf . Comput . Supported Cooperative Work , 2004 , pp . 39 – 48 . [ 28 ] T . Nicolai etal . , “Exploringsocialcontextwiththewirelessrope , ”in Proc . Int . Conf . On Move Meaningful Internet Syst . , 2006 , pp . 874 – 883 . [ 29 ] K . Oh and Y . S . Lee , “Who should I talk to ? Fostering a spontaneous F2F interaction in a conference , ” in Proc . ACM Conf . Comput . Supported Cooperative Work Companion , 2012 , pp . 187 – 190 . [ 30 ] D . O . Olguin , P . A . Gloor , and A . Pentland , “Wearable sensors for perva - sive healthcare management , ” in Proc . 3rd Int . Conf . Pervasive Comput . Technol . Healthcare , 2009 , pp . 1 – 4 . [ 31 ] D . O . Olguin and A . Pentland , “Assessing group performance from collective behavior , ” Workshop on Collective Intelligence in Organiza - tions : Towards a Research Agenda . ( 2010 , Feb . 6 ) . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . parc . com / content / events / attachments / CIORG _ Olguin _ ACM . pdf . Accessed on : Dec . 14 , 2016 . [ 32 ] D . O . Olguin , B . N . Waber , T . Kim , A . Mohan , K . Ara , and A . Pentland , “Sensible organization : Technology and methodology for automatically measuring organizational behavior , ” IEEE Trans . Syst . Man Cybern . B , Cybern . , vol . 39 , no . 1 , pp . 43 – 55 , Feb . 2009 . [ 33 ] W . Pan et al . , “Fortune monitor or fortune teller : Understanding the con - nection between interaction patterns and ﬁnancial status , ” in Proc . 3rd IEEE Int . Conf . Social Comput . , 2011 , pp . 200 – 207 . JANG et al . : SYSTEM TO ANALYZE GROUP SOCIALIZING BEHAVIORS IN SOCIAL PARTIES 813 [ 34 ] D . L . Paulhus and D . B . Reid , “Enhancement and Denial in socially desir - able responding , ” J . Personality Social Psychol . , vol . 60 , no . 2 , pp . 307 – 317 , 1991 . [ 35 ] A . Pentland , “Socially aware , computation and communication , ” Com - puter , vol . 38 , no . 3 , pp . 33 – 40 , 2005 . [ 36 ] M . Rabbi et al . , “Passive and in - situ assessment of mental and physical well - being using mobile sensors , ” in Proc . 13th Int . Conf . Ubiquitous Comput . , 2011 , pp . 385 – 394 . [ 37 ] K . K . Rachuri et al . , “EmotionSense : A mobile phones based adaptive platform for experimental social psychology research , ” in Proc . 12th ACM Int . Conf . Ubiquitous Comput . , 2010 , pp . 281 – 290 . [ 38 ] W . M . Rand , “Objective criteria for the evaluation of clustering methods , ” J . Amer . Statist . Assoc , vol . 66 , no . 336 , pp . 846 – 850 , 1971 . [ 39 ] D . Shelly et al . , “Leveraging social software for social networking and community developmentat events , ” in Proc . 4th Int . Conf . Commun . Tech - nol . , 2009 , pp . 235 – 244 . [ 40 ] J . Terken and J . Sturm , “Multimodal support for social dynamics in co - located meetings , ” Pers . Ubiquitous Comput . , vol . 14 , no . 8 , pp . 703 – 714 , 2010 . [ 41 ] N . Toshiya , S . Yasuyuki , and N . Toyoaki , “Neary : Conversation ﬁeld detectionbasedonsimilarityofauditorysituation , ”in Proc . 10thWorkshop Mobile Comput . Syst . Appl . , 2009 , pp . 1 – 6 . [ 42 ] D . Wyatt , T . Choudhury , J . Bilmes , andJ . A . Kitts , “Towardstheautomated socialanalysisofsituatedspeechdata , ”in Proc . 10thInt . Conf . Ubiquitous Comput . , 2008 , pp . 168 – 171 . [ 43 ] D . Wyatt et al . , “Inferring colocation and conversation networks from privacy - sensitive audio with implications for computational social sci - ence , ” ACM Trans . Intell . Syst . Technol . , vol . 2 , no . 1 , Jan . 2011 , Art . no . 7 . [ 44 ] B . Xu et al . , “Social linking and physical proximity in a mobile location - based service , ” in Proc . 1st Int . Workshop Mobile Location Based Service , 2011 , pp . 99 – 108 . [ 45 ] Z . Yu , H . Wang , B . Guo , T . Gu , and T . Mei , “Supporting Serendipitous social interaction using human mobility prediction , ” IEEE Trans . Human Mach . Syst . , vol . 45 , no . 6 , pp . 811 – 818 , Dec . 2015 . [ 46 ] Z . Yu etal . , “WhoshouldIinviteformyparty ? Combininguserpreference and inﬂuence maximization for social events , ” in Proc . ACM Int . Joint Conf . Pervasive Ubiquitous Comput . , 2015 , pp . 879 – 883 . [ 47 ] B . Guo , Z . Yu , L . Chen , X . Zhou , and X . Ma , “MobiGroup : enabling lifecyclesupporttosocialactivityorganizationandsuggestionwithmobilecrowdsensing , ” IEEE Trans . Human - Mach . Syst . , vol . 46 , no . 3 , pp . 390 – 402 , Jun . 2016 . [ 48 ] H . Du , Z . Yu , F . Yi , Z . Wang , Q . Han , and B . Guo , “Group Mobility classiﬁcation and structure recognition using mobile devices , ” in Proc . Int . Conf . Pervasive Comput . Commun . , pp . 1 – 9 , Mar . 2016 . [ 49 ] R . Sen et al . , “Grumon : Fast and accurate group monitoring for hetero - geneous urban spaces , ” in Proc . 12th ACM Conf . Embedded Netw . Sensor Syst . , 2014 , pp . 46 – 60 . [ 50 ] B . Guo , Z . Yu , D . Zhang , H . He , J . Tian , and X . Zhou , “Toward a group - aware smartphone sensing system , ” IEEE Pervasive Comput . , vol . 13 , no . 4 , pp . 80 – 88 , Oct . – Dec . 2014 . [ 51 ] [ Online ] . Available : Weka . http : / / www . cs . waikato . ac . nz / ml / weka / . Ac - cessed on : Dec . 14 , 2016 . [ 52 ] T . Kanungo et al . , “An efﬁcient k - means clustering algorithm : Analysis and implementation , ” IEEE Trans . Pattern Anal . Mach . Intell . , vol . 24 , no . 7 , pp . 881 – 892 , Jul . 2002 . [ 53 ] M . Ankerst et al . , “OPTICS : Ordering points to identify the cluster - ing structure , ” in Proc . ACM SIGMOD Int . Conf . Manage . Data , 1999 . pp . 49 – 60 . HyukjaeJang receivedthePh . D . degreeincomputer sciencefromtheKoreaAdvancedInstituteofScienceandTechnology ( KAIST ) , Daejeon , South Korea , in 2013 . He is a Software Engineer with LINE Plus Cor - poration , Seongnam - si , South Korea . His research interests include UX design in mobile environments , mobile context - aware services related to social com - puting , children and education , and pervasive game experiences . Sungwon P . Choe received the Master of Com - puter and Information Technology ( MCIT ) from The University of Pennsylvania in 2003 , and the All - But - Dissertation Ph . D . certiﬁcate in computer sci - ence from the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology ( KAIST ) , Daejeon , South Korea , in 2012 . He is a Senior Software Engineer at UPMC En - terprise Development Services , Pittsburgh , PA , USA . His research interests include the interaction between computing technology and developmental levels of consciousness . Simon N . B . Gunkel is working toward the Ph . D . de - greeintheDistributedandInteractiveSystemsGroup ( DIS ) , Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica , Amster - dam , The Netherlands . His Ph . D . work focuses on remote communication and optimization strategies that balance limitations of the user , system , and network . Seungwoo Kang ( M’16 ) received the Ph . D . degree in computer science from the Korea Advanced Insti - tute of Science and Technology ( KAIST ) , Daejeon , South Korea , in 2010 . He is an Assistant Professor in the School of Computer Science and Engineering , KOREATECH , Cheonan , South Korea . His research interests include mobile and ubiquitous computing , and the Internet of Things . Junehwa Song ( M’09 ) received the Ph . D . degree in computer science from the University of Maryland , College Park , MD , USA , in 1997 . HeisaProfessorintheSchoolofComputingatthe Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology ( KAIST ) , Daejeon , South Korea . His research inter - ests include mobile and ubiquitous systems , Internet technologies , and multimedia systems .