The impact of designers’ goals on design - by - analogy Leyla Alipour , Mohsen Faizi and Asghar M . Moradi , School of Architecture and Environmental Design , Iran University of Science and Technology , Tehran , Iran Gholamreza Akrami , School of Architecture , University of Tehran , Tehran , Iran Selection of source is an important step in design - by - analogy . The aim of this study is to explore the impact of designers’ goals for source selection on analogical design outcome . Participants consist of 130 architecture students involved in a design - by - analogy practice . The results indicate that there are signiﬁcant relations between designers’ goals and the type of selected source , similarity between source and target , and novelty of the design ideas . Moreover , the ﬁndings indicate that goals of function , climate response , and symbolism improve the similarity between source and target and novelty of ideas ; while goals of familiarity , aesthetics , and economy of time hinder them . We conclude that design expertise can enhance students’ ability in analogical design with an impact on their goals . (cid:1) 2017 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : design - by - analogy , architectural design , design precedents , crea - tivity , design education D esign students and expert designers frequently use the design - by - analogy method . Analogy involves transfer of knowledge from one known domain ( source ) to another domain ( target ) ( Blanchette & Dunbar , 2000 ) . Analogical reasoning entails utilization of ‘source’ information as a means to facilitate attempts to solve the ‘target’ problem ( Ball , Ormerod , & Morley , 2004 ) . Previous studies conﬁrmed the importance of analogical thinking in design in general ( Ball et al . , 2004 ; Ozkan & Dogan , 2013 ) and in architectural design in particular ( Casakin & Goldschmidt , 1999 ; Casakin , 2004 ) . Selection of source is regarded as an important step in design - by - analogy , which aﬀects the success of analogy ( Casakin & Goldschmidt , 1999 ; Goldschmidt , 2001 ) . The goals formulated for source selection can be considered as the funda - mental factors in analogical reasoning ( Holyoak & Thagard , 1997 ; Ward , 1998 ) . Designers’ goals for source selection inﬂuence the selection of sources and may aﬀect the outcome of analogical design . Previously conducted studies conﬁrmed that designers’ level of expertise aﬀected designers’ selection of Corresponding author : L . Alipour leilaalipour @ arch . iust . ac . ir www . elsevier . com / locate / destud 0142 - 694X Design Studies - - ( 2017 ) - - e - - http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2017 . 04 . 001 1 (cid:1) 2017 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Please cite this article in press as : Alipour , L . , et al . , The impact of designers’ goals on design - by - analogy , Design Studies ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2017 . 04 . 001 source as well as their goals ( Chai , Cen , Ruan , Yang , & Li , 2015 ; Ozkan & Dogan , 2013 ) . Ozkan and Dogan ( 2013 ) demonstrated that designers’ goals are directly aﬀected by their design expertise . Some researchers considered the distance between source and target ( analogical distance ) as an important factor aﬀecting the outcome of analogical design ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ; Goldschmidt , 2011 ; Chan et al . , 2011 ; Fu et al . , 2013 ) . Moreover , select - ing a source from among near or far sources is aﬀected by designers’ purposes . Designers seeking extraordinary forms of creativity select far sources , and those looking for minor novelty select near sources ( Ozkan & Dogan , 2013 ; Ward , 1998 ) . Previous studies in design - by - analogy indicate the importance of designers’ goals ; therefore this study aims at specifying those set of designers’ goals that have remarkable eﬀects on design - by - analogy and presents the results of an experimental study investigating the eﬀect of designers’ goals on source selection , similarity between source and design ideas , and novelty of design ideas . This study focuses on designers’ goals , investigates their impact on design - by - analogy , and speciﬁes eﬀective goals . It is predicted that there are relations between designers’ goals and type of selected sources , similarity be - tween source and solution , novelty of design ideas , and the level of designers’ expertise . 1 Background 1 . 1 Analogical design Analogy is an important method for ideation in design ( Moreno et al . , 2014 ) . Both expert and novice designers use design - by - analogy method ( Ball et al . , 2004 ) , which is a fundamental strategy in problem solving and originates from thinking based on similarities ( Vosniadou & Ortony , 1989 ) . Casakin and Goldschmidt ( 1999 ) found that using visual analogy can help students in architectural design . Moreover , it can help experts to solve ill - deﬁned prob - lems ( Casakin , 2005 , 2010 ) . Analogical design process consists of either iden - tiﬁcation , retrieval , mapping , and transference steps ( Casakin , 2004 ) , or two steps of mapping from source to abstraction and from abstraction to the new design ( Goldschmidt , 2001 ) . Gentner ( 1983 ) discussed structural mapping as mapping the relation between objects and not the attributes of objects . She diﬀerentiated the types of similar - ity between source and target as literal similarity , in which a large number of attributes are mapped from source to target , consisting of object and relation attributes ; analogy , in which only relation attributes and not object ones are mapped ; abstraction , in which the source is an abstract relational structure , all attributes are mapped to the target , and no attribute remains unmapped ; anomaly , in which no similarity is established between source and target 2 Design Studies Vol - - No . - - Month 2017 Please cite this article in press as : Alipour , L . , et al . , The impact of designers’ goals on design - by - analogy , Design Studies ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2017 . 04 . 001