Organization Science Vol . 18 , No . 1 , January – February 2007 , pp . 39 – 54 issn 1047 - 7039 (cid:1) eissn 1526 - 5455 (cid:1) 07 (cid:1) 1801 (cid:1) 0039 inf orms ® doi 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1060 . 0216 ©2007 INFORMS Two Faces of Search : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation Thorbjørn Knudsen Department of Marketing , University of Southern Denmark , 55 Campusvej , Odense 5230 , Denmark , tok @ sem . sdu . dk Daniel A . Levinthal The Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 , levinthal @ wharton . upenn . edu A t its core , a behavioral theory of choice has two fundamental attributes that distinguish it from traditional economic models of decision making . One attribute is that choice sets are not available ex ante to actors , but must be constructed . This notion is well established in our models of learning and adaptation . The second fundamental postulate is that the evaluation of alternatives is likely to be imperfect . Despite the enshrinement of the notion of bounded rationality in the organizations literature , this second postulate has been largely ignored in our formal models of learning and adaptation . We develop a structure with which to capture the imperfect evaluation of alternatives at the individual level and then explore the implications of alternative organizational structures , comprising such individual actors , on organizational decision making . Key words : organizational search ; bounded rationality ; organizational decision making A central building block of the behavioral theory of the ﬁrm is the notion of bounded rationality ( Simon 1955 ) . In contrast to the optimizing agent of neoclassical economics , Simon offered the satisﬁcing decision maker . The set of alternative actions are not presumed to be laid out in their entirety ex ante , but must be discovered or searched . This facet of the behavioral theory of the ﬁrm ( March and Simon 1958 , Cyert and March 1963 , Nelson and Winter 1982 ) is by now well established . However , another critical facet of bounded rationality has been largely ignored in this tradition , and that is how alternatives , once identiﬁed , are to be evaluated . Simon ( 1955 ) suggested that , rather than optimizing a utility function , individuals search for alternatives until they identify one that satisﬁes some minimum perfor - mance criteria—i . e . , in his words , individuals engage in satisﬁcing behavior . Central to this perspective is the view that choice alternatives are considered in a sequen - tial manner and that the process of the sequential eval - uation of alternatives stops well short of some latent optimal possible option . What is less salient , though con - sidered in the original discussion , is how actors are to evaluate the proposed solutions or alternatives . How is an actor to know whether a given alternative in fact “sat - isﬁces” or not ? Simon ( 1955 ) noted that there may be uncertainty as to whether a particular alternative yields a state of nature that is in the satisfactory set or not , but the text suggests that this indeterminacy may be resolved by identifying a new alternative that does not suffer this risk . However , this discussion points to an important lacuna in both this early and subsequent development of behavioral theories of individuals and ﬁrms . 1 While ideas of search are central in behavioral the - ories of the ﬁrm ( March and Simon 1958 , Cyert and March 1963 ) , the mechanisms by which these alterna - tives are evaluated are less clearly developed ( Gavetti and Levinthal 2000 ) . Models of adaptive search gener - ally have the following characteristics . Some space of possible alternatives is sampled . The realization from this draw is then compared either to the current status quo action , or , in other cases , to an aspiration level ( e . g . , Levinthal and March 1981 , Nelson and Winter 1982 , Lant and Mezias 1990 ) . When the space of alternatives constitutes attributes such as prices ( Stigler 1961 , Nelson 1970 ) , assuming that quality attributes are well deﬁned and equal , then the model does not seem to require any elaboration . However , consider other possible spaces of alternatives , such as the space of possible spouses or the set of possible new production technologies for a fac - tory . When presented with a new alternative from one of these sorts of spaces , how is one to recognize a satis - factory solution when one is confronted with a proposed solution ? When is one to stop searching for alternatives ? Despite the neglect of uncertain evaluation in our mod - els of adaptive search , it is an important characteristic of many task environments . Another important gap in our formal models of search is that the work tends to be remarkably nonorgani - zational ( but see March 1991 , Lin and Carley 1997 , Seshadri and Shapira 2003 , Rivkin and Siggelkow 2003 , and Siggelkow and Rivkin 2005 for important excep - tions ) . While the label of organizations may be invoked , oftentimes the formal structure corresponds to a model of individual - level problem solving . We draw on Chris - tensen and Knudsen’s ( 2004 ) recent extension of the 39 Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation 40 Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) characterization of organiza - tional architectures to provide a framework with which we can consider the impact of alternative organizational structures on search processes . As in the work initiated by Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) and in the Theory of Teams ( Marschak and Radner 1972 ) , the notion of organizational form used in the present study is referring to a stylized representation of the ﬂow of infor - mation among organization members . Thus , a hierar - chy is a centralized information - processing structure and a polyarchy is a decentralized information - processing structure ( Sah and Stiglitz 1986 ) . Therefore , the terms hierarchy and (cid:1) de (cid:2) centralization are used here in a nar - row sense of information - processing structures and do not fully incorporate issues of authority and control ( Weber 1942 ) or , for instance , power and politics ( Pfef - fer 1981 ) . While some progress has been made toward incorporating such considerations into formal models ( cf . Dosi et al . 2003 , Rivkin and Siggelkow 2003 , and Siggelkow and Rivkin 2005 ) , that is not the focus of the current work . Rather , we are concerned with the organi - zation of individual evaluators and the nature of collec - tive evaluation criteria . At a basic level , evaluation of alternatives can suf - fer from two possible errors : Type I errors of rejecting a superior alternative and Type II errors of accepting an inferior alternative . As shown on the work on eco - nomic architecture ( Sah and Stiglitz 1986 , Christensen and Knudsen 2004 ) , different organizational structures vary in their proclivity to make one type of error or the other . In particular , hierarchical structures , in which a proposal needs to be validated by successive ranks of the hierarchy in order to be approved , will tend to reduce the likelihood that an inferior alternative will be adopted—i . e . , hierarchy reduces Type II errors . In con - trast , what Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) term polyarchies— a ﬂat organizational structure in which approval by any one actor in a series of decision makers is sufﬁcient for an alternative to be approved—will tend to minimize the probability of rejecting a superior alternative—i . e . , pol - yarchy reduces Type I errors . Christensen and Knudsen ( 2004 ) provide a general graph - theoretic treatment of these structures that allows one to consider the full range of organizational architectures that range between these two extreme forms , and thereby allows one to specify structures that trade off these two types of errors as the relative degree of hierarchy and polyarchy shifts and , furthermore , to examine the change in the overall reli - ability of the organizational structure as the number of actors within the organization changes . Using this analytical platform , we examine how alter - native organizations of evaluators would move on a space of possible alternatives . In particular , we use the structure of ﬁtness landscapes ( Wright 1931 , Kauffman 1993 ) to characterize a sense in which alternatives are more or less proximate to one another . 2 As characterized by Levinthal ( 1997 ) , a process of local search is mod - eled as examining , at random , one of the adjacent points in the space of alternatives . The values of points in adjacent locations in ﬁtness landscapes , as developed by Kauffman ( 1993 ) , are correlated , with the degree of cor - relation being tuned by the intensity of the interdepen - dencies among the N attributes that contribute to the ﬁt - ness of a given alternative . Changing the level of interde - pendencies also has an impact on the overall structure of the landscape in that the number of local peaks increases with the degree of interdependencies ( Kauffman 1993 ) . The presence of local peaks poses particular challenges to a process of local search , because a decision maker at a local peak will be unable to identify superior alter - natives that may be present on the broader landscape . While the structure of ﬁtness landscapes has been used to consider the issue of organizational adaptation ( cf . , Levinthal 1997 , Rivkin 2000 ) , as with much of the broader literature on search processes , the issue of how alternatives are to be evaluated has been underdeveloped . There have been some recent studies ( e . g . , Rivkin and Siggelkow 2003 , Dosi et al . 2003 , Ethiraj and Levinthal 2004 ) that examined how the allocation of decisions across actors within an organization and the degree to which actors make decisions based on the parochial con - cerns of their local subunit or the payoff to the broader organization affects the adaptive capabilities of an orga - nization . However , in these analyses there is no uncer - tainty as to the payoff implications of the choices being made ; rather , decision - making processes are affected by the perspective ( local versus global , one subunit versus another ) taken by the actors . Closer in spirit to our effort is Gavetti and Levinthal ( 2000 ) , who contrasted evalua - tion that is off - line , in which assessment is done on the basis of actors’ cognitive model of the ﬁtness landscape , and online , in which the evaluation occurs subsequent to experience with the actual alternative . We try to incorporate both faces of a search pro - cess : the sequential identiﬁcation of alternatives and the uncertain evaluation of those alternatives that are identi - ﬁed . Whilst the ﬁrst topic has been studied extensively in previous models of adaptive search , the second topic of uncertain evaluation has been rather neglected . We ﬁnd that highly accurate evaluation of alternatives results in search processes being greatly inﬂuenced by the happen - stance of the order in which alternatives are identiﬁed by the actor . As a consequence , highly accurate evaluators become trapped by their random starting positions in the landscape of alternative actions . Perfect evaluation leads to the rapid identiﬁcation of a local peak and the per - sistence in that location across time . In contrast , imper - fect evaluation leads to a more robust search process that is not as inﬂuenced by the happenstance of one’s starting position in this landscape . Furthermore , we ﬁnd that populations of moderately imperfect evaluators pay a surprisingly modest penalty in terms of the variability Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS 41 in their performance , either in a cross - sectional manner , or across time . 3 We also consider , albeit in a rather stylized manner , how the structure of organizational evaluation of alter - natives impacts these dynamics . Organizations that are hierarchical in structure , even if composed of imperfect evaluators , tend to replicate the conservatism of perfect evaluators and become trapped by local peaks . Hybrid forms , consisting of a mixture of polyarchy and hierar - chy , effectively balance the dual imperatives of explo - ration and exploitation ( Holland 1975 , March 1991 ) . More generally , this work ﬁts into a tradition of an information - based processing approach to contingency theory ( Galbraith 1973 , Burton and Obel 1984 ) . Our analysis points to a three - way contingency among agents’ screening ability , the nature of the problem envi - ronment as deﬁned by the degree of interaction in the task environment , and the structure of decision making within the organization . Screening ability and organiza - tional structure display an important degree of comple - mentarity . The less able ( or , conversely , the more able ) individual evaluators are , the more attractive are orga - nizational forms that tend toward hierarchy ( polyarchy ) as the hierarchical structure tends to compensate for the high error rates of less able individual evaluators ( or , conversely , the variance induced by the polyarchy forms tends to compensate for the overly precise judgments of more able evaluators ) . Model Structure The model structure has three basic elements : the char - acterization of individual evaluation of alternatives , how individual evaluators are aggregated into an organiza - tional form , and the speciﬁcation of the task environment or the space of alternatives . Individual Evaluation of Alternatives Individual evaluators are characterized as being able to distinguish between a proposed action alternative and the status quo with more or less reliability . A perfect eval - uator would , with certainty , distinguish between inferior and superior alternatives no matter how small the value differences are between two proposals . However , deci - sion makers are unlikely to conform to such high stan - dards . Actors are likely to make errors in identifying which of a pair of alternatives is , in fact , superior . How - ever , one would expect that the likelihood of making a false classiﬁcation is a decreasing function of the actual differences in value between the alternatives . That is , one may frequently misclassify pairs of alternatives that vary in payoff by only a small amount . In contrast , if the payoff to the two alternatives is substantially differ - ent , then the probability of making a misclassiﬁcation , while not zero , would certainly be less than in the former case . Thus , misclassiﬁcation is not a random process . Figure 1 Six Levels of Screening Ability for an Evaluator , Ranging from Completely Random Screening (cid:1)(cid:2) = 0 (cid:3) to Perfect Screening (cid:1)(cid:2) → (cid:4) (cid:3) – 0 . 05 – 0 . 04 – 0 . 03 – 0 . 02 – 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 05 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 Fitness difference A cc ep t an c e p r obab ili t y α = 10 α = 5 α = 3 α = 0 α = 50 α → ∞ All evaluators are presumed to be intelligent in that they are more likely to favor superior alternatives ; rather , they are simply assumed to vary in the precision with which they do this . These properties are reﬂected in the screening func - tions represented in Figure 1 . The horizontal axis indi - cates the actual difference in payoffs between a currently held alternative and a proposed alternative ( current ﬁt - ness minus new ﬁtness ) , ranging from large negative dif - ferences in value to large positive differences in values . The vertical axis indicates the probability that an eval - uator would accept the proposed alternative . Obviously , an intelligent screening function should have an upward slope , such that superior alternatives are more likely to be accepted than are inferior alternatives . In the extreme , with a perfect evaluator , the curve would have a point of discontinuity at zero , such that proposed alternatives with a payoff less than the current alternative ( yielding a negative ﬁtness difference ) would be rejected with prob - ability one and those with higher payoff ( positive ﬁtness difference ) accepted with certainty . We specify a family of screening functions f (cid:1)x(cid:2) that takes the difference , x , of current ﬁtness minus new ﬁtness as an argument . The particular functional form used in the present work is a linear screening function , f (cid:1)x(cid:2) = (cid:6)x + (cid:7) . The slope of the line , indicated by the variable (cid:6) , can be interpreted as the screening capability of the evaluator . A steeper slope , or higher value of (cid:6) , implies that the probability of accepting a proposal is more sensitive to changes in its actual value . The cutoff of the line , indicated by the variable (cid:7) , can be inter - preted as the bias of the evaluator’s error ( a higher value of (cid:7) favors Type II errors of accepting an inferior alter - native , while a lower (cid:7) favors Type I errors rejecting a superior alternative ) . Within the class of linear screening Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation 42 Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS functions , we restrict our attention to those that are unbi - ased in that if there is no difference in payoff between the proposed alternative and the current action ( the value of ﬁtness difference is zero ) , then the actor is equally likely to accept or reject the proposed alternative . 4 Thus , we have symmetric errors (cid:7) = 0 and the screening func - tion becomes f (cid:1)x(cid:2) = (cid:6)x . As (cid:6) becomes arbitrarily large (cid:1)(cid:6) → (cid:4) (cid:2) , the screening function approximates that of a perfect evaluator . Aggregation of Individual Evaluators into an Organizational Form Individual evaluators can be aggregated into more com - plex organizational forms . In particular , organizations can be characterized by the number of evaluators within them , but also more subtly by the nature of deci - sion authority within them . Following Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) , we focus on whether or not a given actor has the authority to approve or reject a proposed alternative , or is merely authorized to pass the proposed initiative along within a broader chain of command . In particular , con - sider the ﬂow of decisions in six distinct organizational forms shown in the appendix . In what we term a hier - archy , a proposal is initially considered by the evaluator at the far left in Figure A1 . If the proposal is rejected by that evaluator , it is eliminated from further consider - ation ( indicated in the ﬁgure by the dashed vertical line from that decision node ) . Alternatively , if the proposal is approved by that individual , then it is passed rightward to the next individual in the chain of command . A pro - posal is acted on only if it is positively screened by all six evaluators . The evaluator to the far right , effectively sitting at the top of this hierarchy , views only propos - als that have been successfully vetted by the lower - level actors and has ﬁnal say as to whether the organization adopts those proposed initiatives that reach his or her attention . In a hierarchical evaluation of a stack of job applications , for example , applications are eliminated at each level in the hierarchy and a diminished stack moves up to the next level . The evaluator at the top of the hier - archy will only see a very small stack of applications . At the other extreme is the polyarchy structure . Here , proposed alternatives can be adopted by any of the six decision makers ; an alternative is only dismissed if all decision makers in succession reject it . It is this contrast between the conservative ( rejection - oriented ) hierarchical structure and the acceptance - oriented pol - yarchy structure that Sah and Stiglitz ( 1986 ) considered . Christensen and Knudsen ( 2004 ) developed an analyt - ical structure that allowed them to consider a wide range of hybrid forms that lie intermediate to these two extremes . 5 The appendix illustrates four intermedi - ate forms that range from nearly hierarchical ( Hybrids 1 and 2 ) to nearly polyarchical ( Hybrids 3 and 4 ) . In analyzing the role of alternative organizational forms , we wish to distinguish between the effect of indi - vidual differences in screening ability and the impact Figure 2 Ability of Imperfect Evaluator Compared to Six Organizational Forms , Each Built of Six Identical Imperfect Evaluators – 0 . 05 – 0 . 04 – 0 . 03 – 0 . 02 – 0 . 01 0 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 05 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 Fitness difference A cc ep t an c e p r obab ili t y Polyarchy Hybrid 4 Hybrid 1 Hybrid 2 Hybrid 3 Hierarchy Imperfectagent Notes . We represent the case where n = 6 and (cid:2) = 10 . The ability of the six hybrid organizational forms were derived according to the procedure shown in the appendix . of the structure of the relationship among evaluators within the organization . Therefore , we treat organiza - tions as being homogeneous in the screening ability of the individual evaluators that comprise the organization , although we examine the impact of varying this homo - geneous level . Figure 2 indicates the effective screening properties of six alternative organizational forms , all comprised of 6 evaluators with an (cid:6) value of 10 . It compares the screening function of an individual evaluator ( indicated by the straight diagonal line ) with the screening func - tions of six different organizational forms that are each built from a number ( six ) of such individual agents . Using methods outlined in Christensen and Knudsen ( 2004 ) , we derive an organizational - level screening func - tion , F , which is a mathematical representation of the ﬂow of decisions in an organizational form ( as shown in the appendix ) . In order to examine the effect of chang - ing organizational structure , we assume that all mem - bers in an organization have identical abilities . That is , we assume that the individual - level screening function , f (cid:1)x(cid:2) , the probability that an individual accepts an alter - native , is the same for all members of an organization . In this case , the organizational - level screening function , F , is a polynomial in the individual - level screening func - tion , f (cid:1)x(cid:2) , i . e . , F takes f (cid:1)x(cid:2) as an argument . The particular functional form of F represents an ag - gregation of information ﬂows in the organization under consideration . The appendix shows the organizational - level screening function , F , for the six organizations studied in the present work . Notably , the organizational - level screening function , F , of the six hybrid organiza - tions shown here will change in the same way relative to any screening function f (cid:1)x(cid:2) at the individual level . Thus , the aggregation of an organizational form does not depend on the underlying individual - level screening Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS 43 function . Any given individual - level screening function will be changed in the way shown in Figure 2 . The organizational - level screening function of an n - member hierarchy is F = f (cid:1)x(cid:2) n , and the organiza - tional - level screening function of an n - member pol - yarchy is F = 1 − (cid:1) 1 − f (cid:1)x(cid:2)(cid:2) n . For example , accepting an alternative in the six - member hierarchy requires that all six members accept the alternative . Therefore , the organizational - level screening function of the hierarchy ( shown in Figure 2 ) is given by F = f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 6 , which is the probability that this structure accepts the alternative in question . In a similar way , it is easy to see that the organizational - level screening function of the polyarchy ( shown in Figure 2 ) is given by F = 1 − (cid:1) 1 − f (cid:1)x(cid:2)(cid:2) 6 , i . e . , the probability that at least one out of the six polyarchy members accepts an alternative . The screening functions of the four hybrids shown in the appendix are derived in a similar way . 6 As a point of reference , in Figure 2 we also include for comparison the evaluation function of a single perfect evaluator . 7 The set of possible organizational forms is enormous , with the number of members ranging from n = 2 to inﬁnity . We chose a set of structures with six organiza - tional members—a number sufﬁcient to generate a rich set of possible forms ( there is a total of 223 topologically distinct graphs representing hybrid organizations with six members ) , 8 yet small enough to allow for an explicit representation of the individual organizational forms ( see Figure A1 in the appendix ) . Among these , we picked the four hybrid structures that best spanned the topological ( and functional ) difference between the hierarchy and polyarchy . We see that the screening function of the pol - yarchy lies everywhere above the screening functions of alternative forms . This implies that the polyarchy for any given ﬁtness difference is , as we suggested above , more prone to accept alternatives , even those with a negative value—a Type II error . That is , the polyarchy reduces Type I error at the expense of increasing Type II error . Conversely , hierarchies are very unlikely to mistakenly accept an inferior alternative ( a Type II error ) with the probability of acceptance being near zero for alterna - tives with a negative ﬁtness difference . However , that same caution causes the hierarchical structure to reject many superior alternatives , i . e . , alternatives with a posi - tive ﬁtness difference—a Type I error . Hierarchy reduces Type II error and increases Type I error . Interestingly , the screening function of hybrid forms will trade off the effects of polyarchy and hierarchy : Hybrids reduce both Type II and Type I errors ( in particular , this effect is apparent in Hybrids 2 and 3 ) . Speciﬁcation of the Task Environment The ﬁnal basic element of the model structure concerns the task environment in which evaluators ( and organi - zations ) operate . In prior work on the effect of alterna - tive organizational forms on the effectiveness of screen - ing alternatives , the process of alternative generation is treated as consisting of random draws from a ﬁxed dis - tribution of possibilities ( Sah and Stiglitz 1986 , Chris - tensen and Knudsen 2004 ) . However , research on organi - zational search processes ( March and Simon 1958 , Cyert and March 1963 ) has emphasized the spatial location of the set of possible alternatives , with the notions of local and distant search being central in theoretical ( March and Simon 1958 , Nelson and Winter 1982 ) and empir - ical ( Stuart and Podolny 1996 , Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) analyses . The imagery of spatial location is given clear expression in work on search in ﬁtness landscapes ( Levinthal 1997 ) . The generation of alternatives is not purely random , but is likely to reﬂect the availability of options in the neighborhood of the organization’s current practices . Building on Levinthal ( 1997 ) and related work ( Rivkin 2000 , Rivkin and Siggelkow 2003 , Dosi et al . 2003 ) , the task environment of ﬁtness landscapes ( Kauffman 1993 ) is used to characterize a space of alternatives , where alternatives vary along any one of N dimensions and the correlation among distinct alternatives can be tuned by manipulating how interdependent these N elements are in determining the overall payoff . If attributes of a policy contribute to performance in a relatively independent manner , the landscape of policy alternatives is relatively smooth ; changing one attribute of the policy only affects the performance contribu - tion of that attribute in isolation . In contrast , if pol - icy attributes have a high degree of interdependence , then changing even just one attribute may have broader repercussions and affect the performance contributions of other attributes . As a result , a landscape of alterna - tives in which there is a high degree of interdependence will exhibit a relatively low level of correlation , with even modest shifts in attributes leading to a pronounced change in overall value . Related to this issue of degree of correlation among neighboring alternatives is the num - ber of peaks in this performance landscape . With no interdependence among the policy attributes , there is a single peak in the landscape corresponding to the opti - mal setting of each of the individual policy attributes . As interdependence increases , the performance surface will exhibit local peaks of conﬁgurations of policy attributes that exhibit some degree of internal consistency ( Kauff - man 1993 ) . As regards alternative generation , we adopt the model used in much of the literature , i . e . , randomly perturbing one of the N activities of the ﬁrm . This model pro - vides a stylized representation of myopic local search by examining , at random , one of the adjacent points in the space of alternatives . While agents might perturb more activities , the properties of such longer jumps are fairly well known ( Levinthal 1997 ) . Thus , in order to focus on the issue of alternative evaluation , we limit our analysis of alternative generation to the simple model of myopic local search . Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation 44 Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS More formally , we specify alternatives as consisting of N attributes , a 1 (cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:11)a N . For simplicity , it is assumed that each attribute can take on two states . A perfor - mance landscape is a mapping of any possible vector of ﬁrm choices A = (cid:1)a 1 (cid:11)a 2 (cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:11)a N (cid:2) to performance values V (cid:1)A(cid:2) . We create performance landscapes with a variant of the NK model ( Kauffman 1993 ; see Sorenson 2002 for a review of these models in the organizations litera - ture ) . The value of each individual attribute a i is affected by both the state of that attribute itself and the states of a number of other attributes a − i . Denote the value of attribute a i by c i (cid:1)a i (cid:11)a − i (cid:2) . For each landscape , the par - ticular value of an attribute , c i , is determined by drawing randomly from a uniform distribution over the unit inter - val , i . e . , c i (cid:1)a i (cid:11)a − i (cid:2) ∼ u(cid:18) 0 (cid:11) 1 (cid:19) . The value of a given set of alternatives A is then given by V = (cid:18)c 1 (cid:1)a 1 (cid:11)a − 1 (cid:2) + c 2 (cid:1)a 2 (cid:11)a − 2 (cid:2) + ··· + c N (cid:1)a N (cid:11)a − N (cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:12) The identity of a − i , i . e . , the set of alternatives that affect each attribute a i , is given by the interaction struc - ture of the ﬁrm’s decision problem ( i . e . , the variable K (cid:2) . Analysis To provide some initial understanding of the nature of the adaptive search process modeled here , we ﬁrst con - sider the behavior of individual evaluators , and then , in the subsequent analysis , model the behavior of alterna - tive organizational structures . All results reported here are based on simulations of landscapes with N = 10 . We use K = 3 as a baseline case and , in a later sec - tion , expand the analysis to provide a comprehensive assessment of robustness by considering all levels of K (cid:1) 0 (cid:11) 1 (cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:11)N − 1 (cid:2) . Unless indicated otherwise , our results reﬂect the average of 100 entities searching on each of 100 distinct landscapes , resulting in 10 , 000 unique runs obtained from 100 different landscapes . Each of these landscapes has the same structure in terms of K , the degree of interdependence among attributes in contribut - ing to performance , but represents a distinct draw on the common underlying probability - generating structure . At the beginning of each of the 10 , 000 runs , attribute sets are randomly assigned to the individual entities . In some simulations , 9 we analyze the behavior over a sin - gle , randomly speciﬁed performance landscape , but hold constant the number of unique runs at 10 , 000 . To enhance the comparison across these families of landscapes , we normalize the performance level on each surface so that average performance equals 0 . 5 and max - imum performance equals one . That is , the crude ﬁtness measure à la Kauffman is normalized in order to com - pare the results across different values of K . Using this normalized measure instead of the crude ﬁtness measure does not alter the results in a qualitative sense . 10 Figure 3 Fitness for Perfect Evaluator and Imperfect Evaluator 0 50 100 150 200 250 0 . 50 0 . 55 0 . 60 0 . 65 0 . 70 0 . 75 0 . 80 0 . 85 0 . 90 0 . 95 1 . 00 Time steps Agents - - - Dashed : Imperfect agent , Solid : Perfect agent F i t ne ss Notes . K = 3 , (cid:2) = 10 , 10 (cid:6) 000 evaluators : 100 distinct landscapes with 100 evaluators on each . Individual Evaluators Figure 3 indicates the performance of two types of eval - uators who vary according to the accuracy of their eval - uation function . For the sake of a baseline comparison , we model one as being a perfect evaluator ; in this set - ting , only alternatives that enhance the actual payoff will be accepted . In contrast , the other evaluator (cid:1)(cid:6) = 10 (cid:2) exhibits some intelligence in evaluation ( i . e . , (cid:6) > 0 ) , with the probability of accepting a more favorable alter - native increasing as a linear function of the performance increases associated with that alternative ; however , this evaluator will at times mistakenly accept alternatives that in fact offer inferior performance , and in other instances will reject alternatives that could enhance the organi - zation’s performance ( i . e . , (cid:6) is ﬁnite ) . We see that the perfect evaluator quickly asymptotes in the performance that is achieved , while the imperfect evaluator not only outperforms the perfect evaluator , but , if additional peri - ods are examined , continues to exhibit modest but steady performance improvement . Perfect evaluation leads to the rapid identiﬁcation of a local peak and the per - fect evaluation function will lead the actor to maintain that position for the remainder of the simulation , while imperfect evaluation leads to persistence in search . We would expect , however , that imperfect evaluation would suffer from two possible downsides . First , it is natural to expect that an imperfect evaluator would expe - rience a slower rate of ascent in initial performance gains because an imperfect evaluator , by deﬁnition , will at times make downward moves . 11 Even though the per - fect evaluator converges faster to the local optimum than does the imperfect evaluator , the difference in the initial rate of progress between the imperfect and the perfect evaluator is too slight to be visible in the comparison shown in Figure 3 . However , around Period 40 , we start Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS 45 Figure 4 Distribution of Imperfect Evaluators at Each Peak During the Entire Run N u m be r o f agen t s Fitness - ranked configurations T i m e s t e p s 250 225 200 175 150 125 100 75 50 25 1 , 024 10 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 Note . K = 3 , 10 (cid:6) 000 evaluators each on a single randomly selected landscape . to see a divergence in the two performance curves as the performance of the imperfect evaluator continues on an upward gradient , while that of the perfect evaluator begins to asymptote . With less ability of the imperfect evaluator or larger values of N , the faster convergence of the perfect evaluator to a local optimum becomes more pronounced . 12 The other penalty that imperfect evaluation might exhibit is with respect to a limited ability to maintain , over extended periods of time , the attractive alternatives that have been identiﬁed . Given the noise in his or her evaluation process , even if a global peak is identiﬁed , there is a chance of mistakenly being seduced away from it by an alternative that appears superior . Figure 4 illus - trates the emergence of the distribution of evaluators across the performance landscape , where the 1 , 024 dis - tinct locations in the landscape are ranked ordered from 1 ( the global peak ) to 1 , 024 ( the lowest value ) . 13 In the initial period , locations are randomly arrayed , and hence the distribution of evaluators across locations is quite ﬂat . Rapidly , we see the emergence of clusters of evalu - ators aggregating on speciﬁc locations in the landscape . We see a particular massing of evaluators on the global peak , although given the imperfect evaluations , there is some dispersion of evaluators around this peak—a “cloud” of evaluators , as it were . In contrast , in Figure 5 with perfect evaluations , we see greater cross - sectional dispersion among evaluators as columns of evaluators aligned on distinct local peaks . Figures 4 and 5 also provide more direct evidence regarding the ability of the two populations of evaluators to identify relatively attractive locations in the perfor - mance landscape . We see that the evaluators’ locations across different performance levels are much more dis - persed in the case of imperfect evaluators . Imperfect evaluators tend to mass at locales with the highest level of performance , but occasionally visit discrete locales associated with rather low levels of performance . While imperfect evaluators tend to mass among the highest - performing locations , there are fewer perfect evaluators at these locations . Perfect evaluators tend to spread out at intermediately performing locations . Indeed , imperfect evaluators spread more unevenly than do perfect evaluators , with most locating near the highest - performing locations to a greater degree than do perfect evaluators , but with the right tail being thicker as well ( i . e . , there are more imperfect evaluators than perfect evaluators doing poorly ) . The tendency of imper - fect evaluators to occasionally visit rather low levels of performance is a testimony to their very imperfection . The negative performance effect is offset , however , by a broadening of search that is also caused by the evalua - tor’s imperfection . At the (cid:6) value of 10 used in our base - line ( and , more generally , at intermediate levels of (cid:6) ) , the net effect is that imperfect evaluators , on average , tend to mass at the highest - performing locations , with occasional detours to low - performing places . Building on this analysis , we can convey a more lit - eral sense of the imagery of clouds of evaluators forming more or less tighter clusters of movement around differ - ent performance peaks in the landscape . Figures 4 and 5 indicate the number of evaluators in the two populations Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation 46 Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS Figure 5 Distribution of Perfect Evaluators at Each Peak During the Entire Run N u m be r o f agen t s Fitness - ranked configurations T i m e s t ep s 250 225 200 175 150 125 100 75 50 25 1 , 024 10 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 Note . K = 3 , 10 (cid:6) 000 evaluators each on a single randomly selected landscape . that mass at different locales , but these ﬁgures do not convey a sense of the instability or turbulence in the populations of imperfect evaluators . Imperfect evaluators are , on average , ﬁnding attractive locations in the space of alternatives , but are they wandering at some ( possibly high ) rate of velocity on the performance landscape ? Figure 6 creates a panel of images that conveys a sense of the dispersion of evaluators across locations in terms of the size of the clouds of evaluators massing at a location , and the ﬂux in these constellations of eval - uators . We measure ﬂux , or turbulence , by the ratio of the number of different evaluators who visit a particular point in a given period of time ( the last 10 % of the run in this analysis ) to the average number of evaluators at that location during that same time interval . In Figure 6 , this measure of turbulence is indicated by color , with a darker color indicating a more turbulent setting . As the population of evaluators cools down and this ratio approaches 1 , we use an increasingly lighter color . The size of the circle represents the number of evaluators at that location . Highly imperfect evaluators ( (cid:6) equal to one ) lead to both a very diffuse population ( the circles are numer - ous in number and tend to be of modest size ) and a very turbulent structure , with many different evaluators visiting a given locale ( the clouds are very dark ) . Mod - erately able evaluators ( (cid:6) values of 3 , 5 , and 10 ) result in evaluators clustering on superior locations , with the evaluators forming a few large constellations around the superior points in the performance landscape . Clearly , the degree of turbulence diminishes as the evaluators’ evaluation ability increases , with the color of the clouds shifting from dark to light . However , we see that with populations of evaluators who are highly accurate the clouds tend to be frozen , in that there is little or no tur - bulence . Such freezing tends to result in a number of distinct constellations of evaluators , many of which are not associated with particularly attractive points in the performance landscape . Thus , imperfect evaluators appear not to wander too far away from the attractive peaks that they identify . That is , the clouds of evaluators around the peaks stay tightly clustered . We do not often see a situation in which slightly inferior alternatives are adopted and then , from this new lower base , even more inferior alternatives are mistakenly adopted . It is certainly possible for eval - uators to take such a two - step “walk” from an attractive peak , and on occasion they will do so . However , the fact that the screening process , while imperfect , is nonethe - less intelligent ( in that more favorable alternatives are more likely to be accepted than are less favorable ones ) implies that mistakes ( walks away from superior alter - natives ) will tend to be self - correcting . After accepting an inferior alternative that takes him or her away from an attractive peak , it is more likely that the subsequent move will be back to this same peak rather than a move that takes the evaluator even farther away from this loca - tion . Ironically , the evaluators with an evaluation mech - anism more prone to error exhibit less cross - sectional variability than does the population of perfect evalua - tors . While it is true that perfect evaluators will exhibit greater reliability in terms of period - to - period location Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS 47 Figure 6 Fitness - Ranked Distribution of Evaluators Last 10 % of Run Ability : α = 1 Ability : α = 10 Ability : α = 5 100 75 50 25 1 100 75 50 25 1 100 75 50 25 1 100 75 50 25 1 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Distinct agents / mean number of agents , last 10 % of run Distinct agents / mean number of agents , last 10 % of run Distinct agents / mean number of agents , last 10 % of run Ability : Perfect evaluator Distinct agents / mean number of agents , last 10 % of run F i t ne ss 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 F i t ne ss 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 F i t ne ss 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 F i t ne ss Notes . K = 3 , (cid:2) = (cid:7) 1 (cid:6) 5 (cid:6) 10 (cid:8) , and a perfect evaluator for each level of (cid:2) : 10 , 000 evaluators ( 100 distinct landscapes with 100 evaluators on each ) . The 100 most ﬁt organizational forms are shown . If there are fewer than 100 distinct organizational forms ( as when (cid:2) ≥ 5 ) , then all forms are reported . The number of evaluators at a peak is represented by the area of the circle ( scaled by square root ) . The height of each circle represents the ﬁtness of the peak . Darker colors of circles represent higher turbulence at the peak measured by the ratio of the number of distinct evaluators to the average number of evaluators at that peak . The last panel illustrates the results with a perfect evaluator . and performance differences , we see from Figure 6 that the degree of instability in the behavior of the imperfect evaluator is rather modest . Furthermore , this population convergence among the imperfect evaluators occurs at the highest - performing locations in the landscape . Our main result is driven by the fact that in high K worlds , ﬁrms who do local search ( with perfect eval - uation ) will get stuck on one of the myriad local peaks . A general claim that noise ( perturbations and muta - tions ) is beneﬁcial in complex landscapes is not novel . Scholars have long recognized that in complex environ - ments some degree of perturbation or mutation leads to broader search and better outcomes . Our claim goes fur - ther , however , by considering what may be called intelli - gent noise . Mutation probabilities are ( usually ) identical for all of the alternatives and thus insensitive to ﬁtness differences . In contrast , the screening function intro - duced in the present work is sensitive to the goodness of possible alternatives . An alternative that has much lower ﬁtness than the current alternative will be accepted with a ( very ) low probability . Similarly , alternatives with much higher ﬁtnesses will be accepted with a ( very ) high probability . Finally , alternatives that only differ marginally are accepted with a probability of about 1 / 2 . Thus , imperfect evaluation introduces intelligent search in the sense that error probabilities depend on the per - formance of a new proposed alternative relative to the current . Because the search effort of our imperfect evaluator ( e . g . , (cid:6) = 10 , N = 10 , K = 3 ) is characterized by intel - ligent noise , she can outperform perfect evaluators even if they beneﬁt from ( slight ) random mutations . 14 The Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation 48 Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS reason is that random mutations lead to broader search at the cost of occasional detours to inferior points in the ﬁtness landscape . A screening function , by contrast , can be devised to favor broad search with a much lower probability of experiencing such detours . Even though we have used a linear screening function , our framework allows the screening function to take on any shape . This has two important implications . First , we can model a much larger family of disturbances that may inﬂuence the search process than is feasible with perturbations or mutations of bit - strings . Second , and related , we can capture any kind of deviations from perfect evaluation , including symmetric or nonsymmetric evaluation ( as in prospect theory ) , and other kinds of misguided evalu - ation . This is an important property of our framework because it admits a straightforward way to model cog - nitive biases and evaluation errors emphasized in the behavioral literature ( e . g . , prospect theory ) . Robustness This result that the performance of imperfect evaluators can exceed that of a perfect evaluator is not a knife - edge property of the model . The critical factor regarding the robustness of the analysis relates to the structure of the task environment . We have examined in this base - line analysis a relatively small landscape (cid:1)N = 10 (cid:2) with a moderate degree of interdependence ( K = 3 ) . In the Figure 7 Period 250 Fitness for Varying Evaluator Precision (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3) and K ( 10 , 000 Evaluators : 100 Distinct Landscapes with 100 Evaluators on Each ) F i t ne ss K α 1 . 00 0 . 95 0 . 90 0 . 85 0 . 80 0 . 75 0 . 70 0 . 65 0 . 60 0 . 55 0 . 50 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Inf Note . Fitness of perfect evaluator and imperfect evaluator ( (cid:2) = 10 ) marked at K = 3 . limit , with no interdependencies ( i . e . , K = 0 ) , the land - scape would have just one peak corresponding to the globally maximum ﬁtness level . In such a setting , the fact that perfect evaluators reliably identify their local peak and sustain their position on this peak over time can only serve to enhance performance . However , as long as K takes on a value of one or more , it is possi - ble to identify an imperfect evaluation screening value that results in superior performance . Figure 7 displays the performance level reached in the ﬁnal period ( t = 250 ) for different screening abilities ( (cid:6) values ) in land - scapes that vary in their degree of ruggedness ( i . e . , their K value ) . 15 Not surprisingly , shifting from a zero - intelligence screener ( (cid:6) value of zero ) to evaluators with some ability to discern superior from inferior alternatives ( (cid:6) values of one or more ) leads to a marked improve - ment in performance . However , more surprisingly , as long as K > 0 , we ﬁnd that as the precision of the screeners is increased beyond some threshold level , the performance level that is achieved begins to decline . This threshold is realized at a lower value of (cid:6) in more - complex environments ; it is in more - complex , multipeak landscapes that the enhanced tendency for imperfect evaluators to search is most valuable . Having said that , there are sharply decreasing returns to error at high lev - els of error induced by high levels of imperfect eval - uation ( values of (cid:6) of three or less in Figure 3 ) . This observation highlights a notion of optimal imperfection , Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS 49 and also invites consideration of possible remedies that can help very imperfect evaluators . One obvious remedy would be to improve evaluation by training . When this is not a feasible option , it is conceivable that organiza - tion structures may have an important role in improv - ing the overall ( organization level ) outcome even though the errors of individual evaluators cannot be remedied . This possibility is explored in more detail in the section below . We have explored a relatively small landscape with N = 10 . If the screening function is scaled appropri - ately , the results hold generally independent of the val - ues of N . With higher N , the differences in ﬁtnesses between points in the landscape shrink . This is because a larger set of points in the landscape maps onto the inter - val (cid:18) 0 (cid:11) 1 (cid:19) . If the slope of the screening function is scaled with a factor of sqrt (cid:1) 12 N(cid:2) , the results become invariant to the size of the landscape N , provided the ratio of K to N is held constant . For example , N = 10 , K = 1 and slope (cid:6) gives a result similar to N = 100 , K = 10 and slope sqrt (cid:1) 12 N(cid:2)(cid:6) . With N = 100 and K = 1 , the slope must be additionally increased for the imperfect screener to do better than the perfect screener ( a scaling factor of about 5sqrt (cid:1) 12 N(cid:2) has the desired property ) . All of these claims were supported by additional simulation results comparing (cid:23)N = 100 (cid:11) K = 99 (cid:11) 90 (cid:11) 10 (cid:11) 1 (cid:24) , (cid:23)N = 50 (cid:11) K = 49 (cid:11) 45 (cid:11) 5 (cid:11) 1 (cid:24) , and (cid:23)N = 10 (cid:11) K = 9 (cid:11) 1 (cid:24) . 16 Organizations of Evaluators Search is not merely carried out by individuals in isola - tion , but such individual evaluation is typically embed - ded in a larger organizational context . One actor may endorse an initiative and pass it along to another actor , perhaps a hierarchical superior , for approval . Other actors may have sufﬁcient authority to endorse or termi - nate an initiative on their own . We characterize an orga - nization as consisting of a set of individuals who vary with respect to their authority to terminate proposals ( terminating by their own evaluation or recommending termination to others ) and endorsing proposals ( autho - rizing the proposal on the basis of their own assessment or recommending acceptance to others ) . As previously noted , we can characterize two extreme forms of organizational architectures : hierarchy and pol - yarchy . Hierarchy requires that for an alternative to be accepted it must pass through an approval process at each level of the organization . In this sense , hierarchy is very conservative and is unlikely to make Type II errors of accepting inferior alternatives . In contrast , polyarchy is a structure in which approval by any evaluator within the organization is sufﬁcient for acceptance of an alter - native . As a result , the polyarchy structure tends to be very proinnovation and prochange and tends not to make Type I errors of rejecting superior alternatives . Only one actor in the organization needs to see merit in the ini - tiative for it to be adopted ; however , this same property makes polyarchies prone to making Type II errors of adopting inferior alternatives . We model organizations of a ﬁxed number of actors , six . These organizations include the two pure forms of hierarchy and polyarchy , as well as the four forms intermediate to them ( see Figure 2 , and Figure A1 in the appendix ) . Obviously , organizational structure is an interesting property for a population of imperfect eval - uators ; in contrast , with perfect evaluation the decision outcome would be invariant to structure . Thus , we take the same imperfect evaluation function previously exam - ined in the individual actor analysis and examine orga - nizations of six such actors arrayed according to the six alternative organizational forms . 17 What is the effect of organizational architecture on search processes ? We see that the hierarchical form has many of the properties of the perfect evaluator . Such organizations tend only to walk uphill , albeit slowly , because they tend only to accept new alternatives that do , in fact , lead to an increase in performance . Thus , as with perfect evaluators , they tend to be prisoners of their starting positions , identifying local peaks but not explor - ing more broadly in the landscape . Furthermore , we ﬁnd that our intermediate forms can offer an effective mix of exploration and exploitation ( Holland 1975 , March 1991 ) . Elements of polyarchy enhance the breadth of search , but some degree of hierarchy facilitates the orga - nization’s ability to reliably sustain an attractive position in the landscape , once such a position has been iden - tiﬁed . However , given that even a population of single evaluators is able to cluster rather closely to the most attractive peaks in the landscape , only a modest degree of hierarchy is needed to reliably sustain an attractive position in the performance landscape . Reﬂecting these trade - offs between the search induc - ing polyarchical forms and the inertia generating hier - archical forms , we ﬁnd an important complementarity between organizational form and the screening ability of the evaluators who comprise the organization . Figure 8 provides a cross - sectional slice of Figure 7 at a value of K = 3 while extending the results to encompass the six organizational forms . Thus , Figure 8 examines the per - formance implications of the six organizational forms in the ﬁnal period ( t = 250 (cid:2) , with the screening ability of evaluators within the organization spanning levels from (cid:6) = 1 ( very low ability ) to (cid:6) = 20 ( very high ability ) . We ﬁnd , in this setting , that for (cid:6) values of six or more , the polyarchy yields the highest performance among the six organizational forms . However , it is also important to note that some of the six organizational forms would result in a lower perfor - mance than could be generated by an individual member of the organization ( i . e . , the imperfect evaluator shown with square markers ) . Organizations have the potential to compensate for weaknesses of individual screeners ( hier - archy potentially helping to reduce the extensiveness of Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation 50 Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS Figure 8 Comparison of Period 250 Fitness for Perfect Evaluator , Imperfect Evaluator , and Six Organizational Forms for Each Level of (cid:2) (cid:1)N = 10 , K = 3 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 P H 4 3 2 1 F i t ne ss 0 . 95 0 . 90 0 . 85 0 . 80 0 . 75 0 . 70 0 . 65 0 . 60 0 . 55 0 . 50 α Notes . The perfect evaluator is illustrated with round markers ( no line ) and the imperfect evaluator with square markers ( no line ) . The hierarchy ( H ) and the polyarchy ( P ) are illustrated with thick lines . The four hybrids ( 1 – 4 ) are illustrated with thin lines . Hybrid 1 , in particular , is illustrated with a thin , dashed line . search in the case of highly inaccurate screeners and polyarchy forms usefully enhancing the degree of search for screeners who are more accurate ) , but as indicated in the results in Figure 8 , the inappropriate organizational form may exacerbate the pathologies associated with an individual evaluator . Figure 8 further examines this interrelationship be - tween organizational form and screening ability across a range of screening levels . For very imperfect screening ability ( (cid:6) values of one and two ) , we see that hierarchy yields a substantially higher level of performance rela - tive to the polyarchy form . Hierarchy is a useful com - plement to very imperfect screeners . Individuals who evaluate alternatives with considerable imprecision nat - urally induce considerable breadth of search . Breadth of search has the virtuous quality of preventing organi - zations from locking in prematurely to inferior peaks . Sustained breadth of search , however , has the liabil - ity of generating a more dispersed cloud , or distribu - tion , of organizations around the superior alternatives that come to be identiﬁed in the long run . Thus , highly imperfect evaluators , even if placed in a hierarchical structure , are likely to generate wide - ranging search , but the hierarchical form will enhance the ability of such organizations to retain the attractive solutions that are identiﬁed . Conversely , polyarchy is a desired complement to organizations composed of highly accurate screeners ( (cid:6) values of six or more ) . Accurate screeners are likely to rapidly identify a local peak in the landscape . Pol - yarchy , a form that permits any individual within the organization to approve an alternative , only requires one of the six actors in the organization to view an alter - native as favorable in order to result in its adoption . Thus , as long as the evaluation of the individual evalua - tors composing the organization has some possibility of error , polyarchy compounds the likelihood of accepting an alternative that results in an immediate decline in per - formance ; at the same time , however , polyarchy offers the possibility of broadening search to new regions of the performance landscape . If actors are highly accurate in their individual screening , such organizations do not pay a signiﬁcant price for their proacceptance bias of Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS 51 the polyarchy form in that , in the long run , the distri - bution of organizations is still tightly packed around the superior peaks in the performance landscape . For modest (cid:6) values of 2 – 5 , some hybrid form dom - inates both the hierarchy and the polyarchy : Hybrid 2 dominates at (cid:6) values of 2 and 3 , Hybrid 3 dominates at (cid:6) of 4 , and Hybrid 4 dominates at (cid:6) of 4 . The effect of Hybrid 2 is to somewhat narrow the breadth of search while producing a sharper ability to discrim - inate between alternatives ( as shown in Figure 2 ) . This effect is critical at values of (cid:6) that are modest , but not extremely low ( (cid:6) value of one ) . As the discrimi - natory ability sharpens at values of (cid:6) above three , less hierarchical forms that broaden search are favored , i . e . , Hybrid 3 and Hybrid 4 , and then , with (cid:6) values of 6 or more , the polyarchy . Interestingly , the very simi - lar results produced by Hybrid 1 and Hybrid 2 reﬂect the trade - off between narrowing the breadth of search ( Hybrid 1 ) and sharpening the discriminatory ability ( Hybrid 2 ) . Indeed , these results suggest that organizational forms must be designed to ﬁt the contingencies of the available workforce ( screening ability ) as well as the task envi - ronment ( level of uncertain evaluation and interdepen - dencies among policy attributes ) . Thus , in the same task environment , the more able are the individual evaluators composing the organization , the more that organizational form should shift toward the permissiveness of the pol - yarchy form . Very able evaluators need a structure that accepts and empowers the divergent views of organiza - tional members . Conversely , evaluators who are less able and therefore less discriminating require the repeated checks on behavior that hierarchical elements provide . Note that , as evaluators become near - perfect screeners , performance becomes insensitive to the speciﬁcation of organizational form . In the limit , with perfect screeners , evaluators would simply replicate each other’s evalua - tion decision ; thus , in the limit , performance is invari - ant to organizational form and the number of evaluators engaged in evaluation . Thus , a perfect evaluator would not beneﬁt from being a member of an organization . Conclusion Much of our analysis of search processes has been very one - sided . We recognize that choice sets are not pre - sented to decision makers , but must be identiﬁed through search processes . However , in considering these impor - tant issues of discovery , we have tended to treat the problem of evaluation as trivial or self - evident . However , the question of valuation is far from trivial , and indeed forms the crux of resource allocation processes ( Bower 1970 ) . If , as suggested by the Carnegie School view of the ﬁrm , organizations engage in problemistic search comparing small sets of alternatives to a status quo per - formance , then understanding the nature of that evalu - ation process is critical to understanding the dynamics of search processes and , ultimately , the pattern of ﬁrm adaptation that we observe . While clearly a stylized and admittedly incomplete treatment of this question of evaluation , the work pro - vides some useful redirection of the ﬁeld’s attention , as well as some initial results of interest . An unintended by - product of a precise evaluation mechanism is the short - circuiting of the search process . Highly accurate evaluation systems will rapidly identify one of the local peaks in the neighborhood of the location at which the search process commenced . Evaluation processes under a rather wide range of imprecision will yield superior performance . It is perhaps not surprising that evalua - tion that is less precise would tend to result in search processes persisting for longer periods of time . How - ever , the relatively low variability in the range of behav - ior and performance that such populations experience is quite surprising . Indeed , in a cross - sectional sense , highly accurate evaluators generate greater variability in performance and behavior than do populations of less - precise evaluators . Under moderate ranges of evaluation ability , we observe clouds of evaluators clustering rather tightly around the superior peaks in the performance landscape . In contrast , with highly precise evaluation we observe distinct mass points of evaluators spread out evenly on a variety of local peaks that vary considerably in their performance value . The precision of evaluation and the relative rates of Type I and Type II errors in the evaluation process are importantly affected by the structure of organizational decision processes . Hierarchical organizational forms , for a given screening ability of the evaluators who com - prise it , tend to be cautious and are unlikely to mis - takenly shift to less favorable alternatives . In contrast , ﬂat forms that have a polyarchy quality tend to induce greater search as a result of the greater probability of making such errors in evaluation . Given that highly accurate screeners are likely to stop their search process prematurely , polyarchy as an organizational form is a useful complement to highly accurate screening ability . By the same token , elements of hierarchy can facilitate an organization of rather inaccurate screeners persisting on a favorable course of action , once identiﬁed . This basic analytical structure that we have developed can be enriched and built on in a number of ways . In our current analysis , the generation of alternatives is speci - ﬁed exogenously and is determined by the structure of the performance landscape . As Nelson ( 1982 ) argued , a better cognitive understanding of one’s task environ - ment may allow for more intelligent identiﬁcation of the alternatives to be sampled . We have treated the sam - pling process as deﬁned by local search . While this is an important line of argument in the literature ( from March and Simon 1958 onward ) , it is important to consider the intelligent identiﬁcation of nonlocal options ( Gavetti and Levinthal 2000 ) . Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation 52 Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS A different form of endogeneity that would be inter - esting to consider is with respect to an actor’s screen - ing ability . There is a vast literature on experiential learning ( Argote 1999 ) that suggests that skill at tasks increases with repeated trials . Therefore , it is reason - able to expect that screening ability may change with an actor’s experience with a class of problems . Thus , actors may become quite skillful and accurate in evaluating one class of alternatives , but rather inaccurate in evaluating a different and—for them—novel set of alternatives . Expe - riential learning of this form should tend to acerbate the problem of competency traps previously identiﬁed in the literature ( Levinthal and March 1981 , Levitt and March 1988 ) . By becoming more expert evaluators in the domain of the organization’s current activities , actors are less likely to engage in further search . Consistent with work on organizational demography and innova - tion , and similar to March’s ( 1991 ) model of exploration and exploitation , turnover in personnel and the intro - duction of novice actors may be necessary to facilitate search processes . While there are many such avenues of further inquiry , we wish to reiterate the basic call with which we started . Search is not merely about generating and discovering alternatives . It is equally about judging the value of those alternatives with which one is presented . We hope at a Figure A1 Flow of Decisions in Six Stylized Organizational Forms , Each with Six Members Hierarchy Hybrid 1 Hybrid 2 Hybrid 3 Hybrid 4 Polyarchy Notes . In each of the six organizational forms shown in Figure A1 , proposals enter with the actor in the lower left corner and ﬂow from the left to the right . At each hierarchical level , all members must reject a proposal to avoid it being passed on to higher levels . Dashed lines show rejection of proposals and solid lines show acceptance . Proposals that exit to the right are adopted by the organization . ( The number of organization members that may have a ﬁnal say as to whether the organization adopts a proposal increases from one in the hierarchy to six in the polyarchy . ) broad level , to have redirected the conversation in the organization’s literature to a more balanced considera - tion of search processes , as well as to have provided a particular structure and set of results to facilitate such consideration . Acknowledgments The authors thank Felipe Csaszar , Rich Burton , the associate editor , and the anonymous reviewers for offering very useful comments and advice . Appendix The organizational - level screening function , F , is a polyno - mial in the individual - level screening function , f (cid:1)x(cid:2) , under the assumption that all members of an organization have identi - cal screening functions . Given the ﬂow of decisions shown in Figure A1 , we derive organizational - level screening functions ( shown in Figure 2 ) for the six organizational forms . They are as follows : Hierarchy : F = f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 6 Hybrid 1 : F = f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 6 − 3 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 5 + 2 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 4 + f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 2 Hybrid 2 : F = − f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 6 + 6 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 5 − 12 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 4 + 8 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 3 Hybrid 3 : F = f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 6 − 6 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 5 + 15 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 4 − 18 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 3 + 9 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 2 Hybrid 4 : F = − f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 6 + 4 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 5 − 5 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 4 + 2 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 3 − f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 2 + 2 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) Polyarchy . F = 1 − (cid:1) 1 − f (cid:1)x(cid:2)(cid:2) 6 = − f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 6 + 6 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 5 − 15 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 4 + 20 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 3 − 15 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) 2 + 6 f (cid:1)x(cid:2) Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS 53 Endnotes 1 In contrast , the question of what constitutes an appropri - ate threshold , or aspiration level , has received considerable attention in the literature ( cf . , Greve 2003 , Lant 1992 ) . This boundary of what constitutes satisfactory or nonsatisfactory performance is deﬁned by a comparison of current performance to prior performance , as well as to the performance of others who are viewed by the focal actor as belonging to his or her reference group . 2 While it is common to refer to the value ascribed to the pheno - type as ﬁtness in this structure , the value may better be thought of as a kind of technical performance measure , as opposed to corresponding to a measure of birth and death rates as in the standard biological use of the term “ﬁtness . ” 3 It is important to note that the imperfect evaluation process that we model is not one of random error . Rather , imperfect evaluators are modeled as being intelligent and , in particular , being more likely to select superior alternatives to inferior alter - natives . However , they do so with less - than - perfect reliability . Indeed , in separate analyses not reported here , we demonstrate that perfect evaluators subject to random errors perform less well than the intelligent , but imperfect , evaluators modeled here . 4 One might imagine that actors have a status quo bias , in which case when faced with a new alternative that yields the same payoff as the current alternative , they would be inclined to reject the proposed alternative . We have analyzed screening functions with this property . Essentially , such a bias simply shifts the y intercept of these curves and generates qualitatively similar results to the results provided here . We examine the no - bias condition simply to eliminate the need to introduce another parameter in the subsequent analysis . 5 The critical analytical challenge is to specify the implied orga - nizational screening function that results from a set of individ - uals of a given ability ( or individual screening function as in Figure 1 ) that are organized in a particular structure ( as sug - gested by Figure A1 in the appendix ) . Christensen and Knudsen ( 2004 ) derived this mathematical relationship . 6 For intermediate hybrid structures the organizational - level screening function is bounded by the number of members , n , in that the highest exponent in the polynomial F of any hybrid will be n . Intermediate structures are found by a systematic derivation of the set of feasible paths leading to acceptance and rejection ( Christensen and Knudsen 2004 ) . 7 The issue of organizational form is not relevant in the case of perfect evaluators because each perfect evaluator in the organi - zation would simply replicate the decision of others . 8 We limit the study to organizations that have well - deﬁned , noncyclic information ﬂows as shown in the appendix . That is , there are 223 topologically distinct noncyclic , inward deter - ministic graphs representing hybrid organizations . 9 See Figures 4 and 5 . 10 This claim was supported by additional simulations . 11 This downward movement is masked by the results in Fig - ure 2 because the ﬁgure provides the results for the average performance over a set of runs ( 10 , 000 agents : 100 distinct landscapes with 100 agents on each ) . Examination of individ - ual runs does reveal instances of such downward walks . 12 Conﬁrmed through additional runs that are available from the authors . 13 In Figures 4 – 7 , we analyze the behavior over a single , ran - domly speciﬁed performance landscape ( 10 , 000 agents ) . This allows us to identify a ﬁxed population of 2 N alternatives , or 1 , 024 , given N has a value of 10 in our analysis . These ﬁgures were generated by assigning the average number of agents at each of the 1 , 024 locations for each of the 250 time steps . 14 This conjecture was supported by an illustrative example , comparing the imperfect evaluator ( (cid:6) = 10 (cid:2) with perfect eval - uators that experience random mutations of ( all ) bits in a con - ﬁguration with probability 0 . 001 ( N = 10 , K = 3 ) . In this case , the imperfect evaluator ( (cid:6) = 10 ) outperforms the perfect evalu - ators experiencing random mutations who , in turn , outperform the straight perfect evaluator . Perfect evaluators that experience random mutations of ( all ) bits in a conﬁguration with probabil - ity 0 . 01 ( N = 10 , K = 3 ) are inferior to those experiencing a lower mutation probability as well as imperfect evalutors , but still superior to the perfect evaluator . 15 The values of K = 3 and (cid:6) = 10 and perfect evaluation are indicated in this plot because these two points correspond to the values used in our prior baseline analysis . 16 These results are available on request . 17 Clearly , size is another facet of organizational form that could be varied . However , the set of possible hybrid forms grows exponentially with organizational size . Indeed , Christensen and Knudsen ( 2004 ) showed that with a sufﬁcient number of agents , an organizational form can be speciﬁed that approximates arbi - trarily closely a perfect screening function—i . e . , a function that rejects inferior alternatives and accepts superior alternatives with certainty . However , note that per our analysis of perfect screening in the prior section , perfect screening need not be a desired property . To focus the attention on the role of changing organizational structure from structures that are more hierar - chical to structures that are more polyarchical , we keep the number of actors within the organization ﬁxed . References Argote , L . 1999 . Organizational Learning : Creating , Retaining and Transferring Knowledge . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston , MA . Bower , J . 1970 . Managing the Resource Allocation Process . Harvard University Press , Boston , MA . Burton , R . , B . Obel . 1984 . Designing Efﬁcient Organizations : Mod - eling and Experimentation . North - Holland , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . Christensen , M . , T . Knudsen . 2004 . The architecture of economic orga - nization : Toward a general framework . LINK working paper . Cyert , R . M . , J . G . March . 1963 . A Behavioral Theory of the Firm . Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Dosi , G . , D . Levinthal , L . Marengo . 2003 . Bridging contested terrain : Linking incentive - based and learning perspectives on organiza - tional evolution . Indust . Corporate Change 12 413 – 436 . Ethiraj , S . , D . Levinthal . 2004 . Modularity and innovation in complex systems . Management Sci . 50 159 – 174 . Galbraith , J . 1973 . Designing Complex Organizations . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . Gavetti , G . , D . Levinthal . 2000 . Looking forward and looking back - ward : Cognitive and experiential search . Admin . Sci . Quart . 45 113 – 137 . Greve , H . 2003 . Organizational Learning from Performance Feed - back . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Knudsen and Levinthal : Alternative Generation and Alternative Evaluation 54 Organization Science 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 54 , ©2007 INFORMS Holland , J . H . 1975 . Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems . University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor , MI . Kauffman , S . A . 1993 . The Origins of Order : Self - Organization and Selection in Evolution . Oxford University Press , New York . Lant , T . 1992 . Aspiration level adaptation : An empirical exploration . Management Sci . 38 ( 5 ) 623 – 644 . Lant , T . K . , S . J . Mezias . 1990 . Managing discontinuous change : A simulation study of organizational learning and entrepreneur - ship . Strategic Management J . 11 147 – 179 . Levinthal , D . A . 1997 . Adaptation on rugged landscapes . Management Sci . 43 934 – 950 . Levinthal , D . A . , J . G . March . 1981 . A model of adaptive organiza - tional search . J . Econom . Behav . Organ . 2 307 – 333 . Levitt , Barbara , James G . March . 1988 . Organizational learning . Ann . Rev . Sociol . 14 319 – 340 . Lin , Z . , K . M . Carley . 1997 . Organizational response : The cost per - formance tradeoff . Management Sci . 43 217 – 234 . March , J . G . 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organ . Sci . 2 71 – 87 . March , J . G . , Herbert A . Simon . 1958 . Organizations . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Marschak , J . , R . Radner . 1972 . Economic Theory of Teams . Yale Uni - versity Press , New Haven , CT , London , UK . Nelson , P . 1970 . Information and consumer behavior . J . Political Econom . 78 311 – 329 . Nelson , R . 1982 . The role of knowledge in R & D efﬁciency . Quart . J . Econom . 97 453 – 470 . Nelson , R . , S . Winter . 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Pfeffer , J . 1981 . Power in Organizations . Ballinger Publishing , Cam - bridge , MA . Rivkin , J . W . , 2000 . Invitation of complex strategies . Management Sci . 46 824 – 844 . Rivkin , J . W . , N . Siggelkow . 2003 . Balancing search and stabil - ity : Interdependencies among elements of organizational design . Management Sci . 49 290 – 311 . Rosenkopf , L . , A . Nerkar . 2001 . Beyond local search : Boundary - spanning , exploration , and impact in the optical disk industry . Strategic Management J . 22 287 – 306 . Sah , R . , J . Stiglitz . 1986 . The architecture of economic systems : Hier - archies and polyarchies . Amer . Econom . Rev . 76 716 – 727 . Seshadri , S . , Z . Shapira . 2003 . The ﬂow of ideas and timing of evalu - ation as determinants of knowledge creation . Indust . Corporate Change 12 1099 – 1124 . Siggelkow , N . , J . W . Rivkin . 2005 . Speed and search : Designing organizations for turbulence and complexity . Organ . Sci . 16 ( 2 ) 101 – 122 . Simon , H . A . 1955 . A behavioral model of rational choice . Amer . Econom . Rev . 69 99 – 118 . Simon , H . A . 1962 . The architecture of complexity . Proc . Amer . Phi - los . Soc . 106 467 – 482 . Sorenson , O . 2002 . Interorganizational complexity and computation . J . A . C . Baum , ed . Companion to Organizations . Blackwell , Oxford , UK , 664 – 685 . Stigler , G . 1961 . The economics of information . J . Political Econom . 69 213 – 225 . Stuart , T . , J . Podolny . 1996 . Local search and the evolution of tech - nological capabilities . Strategic Management J . 17 21 – 39 . Weber , M . 1942 . A . Henderson , T . Parsons , trans . The Theory of Social and Economic Organization . Free Press , New York . Wright , S . 1931 . Evolution in Mendelian populations . Genetics 16 97 – 159 .