JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 202 No . 3 545 – 561 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201303044 JCB 545 C . Rome , J . Lisowska , and S . Manet - Dupé contributed equally to this paper . Correspondence to Eva Faurobert : eva . faurobert @ ujf - grenoble . fr ; or Corinne Albiges - Rizo : corinne . albiges - rizo @ ujf - grenoble . fr Abbreviations used in this paper : CCM , cerebral cavernous malformation ; FN , fibronectin ; HUVEC , human umbilical vein endothelial cell . Introduction Familial cerebral cavernous malformations ( CCMs ) in humans result from mutations of CCM1 ( Krit1 ) , CCM2 ( malcavernin , OSM , MGC4607 ) , or CCM3 ( PDCD10 ; Riant et al . , 2010 ) . CCMs consist of clusters of dilated small vessels embedded in a col - lagenous matrix whose blood barrier is compromised by gaps between endothelial cells and by the paucity of surrounding mural cells ( Wong et al . , 2000 ; Clatterbuck et al . , 2001 ) . These lesions affect 0 . 5 % of the worldwide population . They are found in several vascular beds , but the clinical manifestations are del - eterious in brain , where the consequence can be hemorrhagic stroke , seizure , or neurological disorders ( Chan et al . , 2010 ; Yadla et al . , 2010 ) . Proteomic and cellular analyses have shown that CCM1 and CCM2 proteins associate in a complex recruited at the plasma membrane that directs the formation of adherens and tight junctions ( Zawistowski et al . , 2005 ; Glading et al . , 2007 ; Hilder et al . , 2007 ; Faurobert and Albiges - Rizo , 2010 ) and the localization of the Par polarity complex to these junc - tions ( Lampugnani et al . , 2010 ) . CCM1 is an effector of the small G - protein Rap1 known as the master regulator of cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesion ( Béraud - Dufour et al . , 2007 ; Glading et al . , 2007 ; Boettner and Van Aelst , 2009 ) . CCM1 and CCM2 regu - late actomyosin cytoskeleton contractility through the control T he endothelial CCM complex regulates blood vessel stability and permeability . Loss - of - function mutations in CCM genes are responsible for human cerebral cavernous malformations ( CCMs ) , which are character - ized by clusters of hemorrhagic dilated capillaries com - posed of endothelium lacking mural cells and altered sub - endothelial extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . Association of the CCM1 / 2 complex with ICAP - 1 , an inhibitor of  1 in - tegrin , prompted us to investigate whether the CCM com - plex interferes with integrin signaling . We demonstrate that CCM1 / 2 loss resulted in ICAP - 1 destabilization , which increased  1 integrin activation and led to increased RhoA - dependent contractility . The resulting abnormal dis - tribution of forces led to aberrant ECM remodeling around lesions of CCM1 - and CCM2 - deficient mice . ICAP - 1 – deficient vessels displayed similar defects . We demonstrate that a positive feedback loop between the aberrant ECM and internal cellular tension led to decreased endothelial barrier function . Our data support that up - regulation of  1 integrin activation participates in the progression of CCM lesions by destabilizing intercellular junctions through in - creased cell contractility and aberrant ECM remodeling . CCM1 – ICAP - 1 complex controls  1 integrin – dependent endothelial contractility and fibronectin remodeling Eva Faurobert , 1 , 2 , 3 Claire Rome , 1 , 3 Justyna Lisowska , 1 , 2 , 3 Sandra Manet - Dupé , 1 , 2 , 3 Gwénola Boulday , 4 Marilyne Malbouyres , 7 Martial Balland , 3 , 8 Anne - Pascale Bouin , 1 , 2 , 3 Michelle Kéramidas , 1 , 3 Daniel Bouvard , 1 , 2 , 3 Jean - Luc Coll , 1 , 3 Florence Ruggiero , 7 Elisabeth Tournier - Lasserve , 4 , 5 , 6 and Corinne Albiges - Rizo 1 , 2 , 3 1 INSERM U823 , Institut Albert Bonniot , Grenoble F - 38042 , France 2 ERL Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ( CNRS ) 5284 , Grenoble F - 38042 , France 3 Université Joseph Fourier , Grenoble F - 38042 , France 4 INSERM , UMR - S 740 , Université Paris Diderot , Paris F - 75010 , France 5 Université Paris 7 - Denis Diderot , Faculté de Médecine , Site Lariboisière , Paris , F - 75010 , France 6 AP - HP , Groupe hospitalier Saint - Louis Lariboisiere - Fernand - Widal , Paris F - 75010 , France 7 UMR CNRS 5242 - ENS Lyon , Lyon F - 69634 , France 8 Laboratoire interdisciplinaire de Physique UMR CNRS 5588 , Saint Martin d’Hères F - 38041 , France © 2013 Faurobert et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the pub - lication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 546 Results ICAP - 1 is stabilized by CCM1 and CCM2 Mouse - inducible endothelial - specific knock - out of CCM1 and CCM2 generates lesions identical to human CCM lesions ( Boulday et al . , 2011 ; Chan et al . , 2011 ; Cunningham et al . , 2011 ) . Because ICAP - 1 , a  1 integrin – negative regulator , associates with the CCM1 – CCM2 complex through its direct binding to CCM1 , we asked whether the stability of ICAP - 1 would be affected by the absence of CCM1 or CCM2 . CCM1 and CCM2 knock - down in HUVECs led to a dramatic loss of ICAP - 1 protein ( Fig . 1 A ) . Less than 10 % of ICAP - 1 was left in these cells compared with HUVECs transfected with CT siRNA ( Fig . 1 B ) . A similar loss of ICAP - 1 was observed in ccm2  /  embryos ( Fig . 1 D and Fig . S1 A ) , confirming our results in vivo . CCM1 level was also strongly reduced in ICAP - 1 – or CCM2 - silenced HUVECs ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) and in tissues from CCM2 - or ICAP - 1 – invalidated mice ( Fig . 1 , D and E ; and Fig . S1 B ) . CCM2 was much less affected by the loss of its CCM partners ;  70 % of CCM2 remained upon ICAP - 1 and CCM1 loss ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . ICAP - 1 and CCM1 losses were not due to reduced gene expression ( Fig . 1 C ) , but instead to protein instability . Overexpression of CCM1 together with ICAP - 1 inhibited the proteasomal degra - dation of ICAP - 1 and prolonged its lifetime in CHO cells after blockage of protein synthesis by cycloheximide ( Fig . 1 , F and G ) . CCM1 – ICAP - 1 interaction was necessary for ICAP - 1 stabiliza - tion : A mutant of CCM1 unable to interact with ICAP - 1 ( CCM1 N192A - Y195A ; Zhang et al . , 2001 ) did not stabilize ICAP - 1 ( Fig . 1 , F and G ) , and the fusion to ICAP - 1 of the N terminus of CCM1 containing ICAP - 1 – binding site strongly improved the solubility of ICAP - 1 produced in bacteria ( unpublished data ) . Overexpression of CCM2 together with ICAP - 1 did not signifi - cantly prolong ICAP - 1 lifetime , consistent with the absence of a direct interaction between the two proteins ( Fig . 1 G ) . How - ever , coexpression of CCM2 together with CCM1 significantly increased ICAP - 1 lifetime compared with coexpression of CCM1 alone ( Fig . 1 G ) . This suggests that CCM2 stabilizes CCM1 , which in turn stabilizes ICAP - 1 by interacting with it . We were not able to measure CCM1 and CCM2 lifetimes , probably be - cause they are much longer than that of ICAP - 1 and not measur - able because of the toxicity of cycloheximide when added for too long on the cells . Overall , our studies strongly support that ICAP - 1 and CCM1 are mutually stabilized by their interaction and that CCM2 acts as a scaffold for this binary complex . Im - portantly , the ICAP - 1 – CCM1 complex is lost upon in vivo or in vitro depletion in CCM1 or CCM2 . CCM1 and CCM2 control  1 integrin activation and spatial distribution ICAP - 1 inhibits the activated state of  1 integrin and controls the distribution of  1 integrin – containing focal adhesions ( Bouvard et al . , 2007 ; Millon - Frémillon et al . , 2008 ) . Because CCM1 - or CCM2 - depleted HUVECs express much less ICAP - 1 protein than CT cells , we asked whether CCM1 / 2 loss would impact  1 integrin activation . We examined activated  1 integrin state by flow cytometry using an activated state - specific antibody , 9EG7 ( Bazzoni et al . , 1995 ) . Flow cytofluorometry was performed of RhoA activation and subsequent ROCK activity ( Borikova et al . , 2010 ; Chan et al . , 2010 ; Stockton et al . , 2010 ) . Until now , studies on CCM proteins have focused on the regulation of cell – cell junctions . The dialogue of the endothelial cell with its extracellular matrix ( ECM ) may also be controlled by CCM proteins : there are defects in the ultrastructure of the basal lamina juxtaposed to endothelial cells in human or mouse CCM lesions ( Wong et al . , 2000 ; Clatterbuck et al . , 2001 ; Chan et al . , 2011 ; McDonald et al . , 2011 ) and ICAP - 1 , a negative regulator of  1 integrin , associates with the CCM1 – CCM2 com - plex ( Hilder et al . , 2007 ) through direct interaction with CCM1 ( Zhang et al . , 2001 ; Zawistowski et al . , 2002 ) . ICAP - 1 inhibits  1 integrin interaction with ECM ( Bouvard et al . , 2007 ; Millon - Frémillon et al . , 2008 ) by binding specifically to  1 integrin cytoplasmic tail ( Chang et al . , 1997 ; Zhang and Hemler , 1999 ; Bouvard et al . , 2003 , 2006 ) . Integrins are  heterodimeric transmembrane receptors that upon activation link the ECM to intracellular signaling pathways and to the actin cytoskeleton , allowing outside - in and inside - out flows of information ( Hynes , 2002 ) . Integrins play an important role in tissue morphogene - sis by regulating cell adhesion to ECM , cell shape and polarity , cell migration , and actomyosin cytoskeleton architecture as well as ECM deposition and remodeling ( Huttenlocher et al . , 1996 ; Papusheva and Heisenberg , 2010 ; Schwarzbauer and DeSimone , 2011 ) . ICAP - 1 is involved in the bidirectional cross talk be - tween the cell and its ECM . It enables the cell to sense and adapt its adhesive and migratory responses to the ECM density ( Millon - Frémillon et al . , 2008 ) , and regulates ECM organiza - tion in bones by controlling fibronectin ( FN ) fibrillogenesis ( Brunner et al . , 2011 ) . FN fibrils are deposited on the cell surface in an  5  1 integrin – dependent process ( Singh et al . , 2010 ) . FN is a major component of the provisional ECM produced during sprouting angiogenesis .  1 integrin and FN fibrillogenesis are crucial for endothelial tubulogenesis and branching , mural cell apposition , and regulation of lumen diameter ( Abraham et al . , 2008 ; Zhou et al . , 2008 ; Stratman et al . , 2009 ; Zovein et al . , 2010 ; Mettouchi , 2012 ) . ICAP - 1 stimulates Notch signaling and is anti - angiogenic in HUVECs implanted in mice ( Brütsch et al . , 2010 ) , but its role on in vivo blood vessel morphogenesis and vascular integ - rity is unknown . We show that ICAP - 1 is strongly destabilized when either CCM1 or CCM2 is lost , suggesting ICAP - 1 – associated func - tions are impaired in human CCM pathology . We demonstrate for the first time that increased cell contractility upon CCM1 / 2 loss results from higher  1 integrin activation subsequently to ICAP - 1 destabilization . As a result of increased  1 integrin ac - tivation and redistribution of traction forces to the cell body , CCM1 - or CCM2 - depleted endothelial cells do not remodel FN correctly . Consistent with our in vitro findings , altered FN remod - eling and ECM organization are observed around CCM lesions of CCM1 - and CCM2 - deficient mice and ICAP - 1 – deficient blood vessels . Importantly , we demonstrate that a feedback loop be - tween this aberrant ECM and internal tension decreases endothe - lial barrier function . Altogether , our results support the idea that ICAP - 1 loss and  1 integrin activation participate in the pro - gression of CCM lesions by increasing intracellular tensions . 547 Microenvironment remodeling by  1 integrin in CCM • Faurobert et al . Figure 1 . CCM1 and ICAP - 1 proteins are destabilized upon CCM1 and CCM2 loss . ( A ) ICAP - 1 , CCM1 , and CCM2 protein content in total lysates of KD HUVECs was analyzed by Western blot . ( B ) Quantification of the three proteins normalized to actin in silenced HUVEC ; Error bars are ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . ICAP - 1 and CCM1 proteins were strongly reduced in the three conditions . ( C ) Q - PCR measurements show that knock - down of one protein had not effect on the expression of the two other partners . Error bars are means ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . ( D ) Western blot of CCM2 + / + and  /  embryo lysates showing the loss of CCM1 and ICAP - 1 proteins upon CCM2 depletion . Remaining CCM2 comes from maternal material . ( E ) Western blot of ICAP - 1 andCCM1 in liver lysates from ICAP - 1 + / + and ICAP - 1  /  mice . One fourth of CCM1 protein remains in ICAP - 1  /  mice ( see Fig . S1 C for densitometric analysis ) . Black lines indicate that intervening lanes have been spliced out for presentation purposes . ( F ) Overexpressed ICAP - 1 protein in CHO is stabilized by the coexpression of CCM1 but not of the N192 - Y195 non - interacting CCM1 mutant . Cycloheximide was added at t = 0 to block protein synthesis with or without the proteasomal inhibitor MG132 . Results are representative of three independent experiments . ( G ) Quantification of ICAP - 1 protein level over a time - course after addition of cycloheximide when expressed alone or in different combinations with CCM1 and / or CCM2 . Results are representative of two independent experiments . JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 548 of the actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 2 F ) , suggesting that in normal endo - thelial cells , CCM1 / 2 proteins maintain the activity of  1 integ - rin low and thereby limit its effect on the actin cytoskeleton . On confluent HUVECs , the appearance of transversal stress fibers upon CCM1 or 2 loss is associated with reduced VE - cadherin and  catenin staining to cell – cell junctions ( Glading et al . , 2007 ; Whitehead et al . , 2009 ) . Similarly , ICAP - 1 silencing led to an increase in actin stress fibers on confluent HUVECs and to a decrease in VE - cadherin and  - catenin junctional stain - ing ( Fig . 2 G , Fig . S4 ) . Additional depletion in  1 integrin but not in  3 integrin led to the disappearance in the transversal actin fibers on confluent monolayers of HUVECs ( Fig . 2 G ) , showing that in confluent as in sparse HUVECs , the control of the actin cytoskeleton architecture by CCM proteins involves  1 integrin . Because CCM1 or CCM2 loss in HUVECs changed the architecture of the actin cytoskeleton , we hypothesized that the distribution of the traction forces developed by these cells would be modified . Phosphorylated myosin light chain ( pMLC ) and zyxin , which localize to tense actomyosin fibers ( Colombelli et al . , 2009 ) , were uniformly distributed along the transversal actin fibers in CCM1 - , CCM2 - , or ICAP - 1 – depleted HUVECs , as compared with their peripheral localization in CT cells ( Fig . 3 A ) . Additional silencing of  1 integrin in sparse ICAP - 1 – or CCM1 / 2 - silenced HUVECs restored the peripheral localization of pMLC and zyxin , whereas  3 integrin depletion did not ( Fig . S3 D ) . To correlate the relocalization of these tension markers with the forces developed by these cells , we visualized by traction force microscopy the distribution of the forces when cells were plated on FN - coated polyacrylamide gels . Forces were concentrated in the cell periphery in CT HUVECs ( Fig . 3 , B and C ) , which is consistent with a peripheral localization of focal adhesions and actin cytoskeleton . However , in CCM1 - , CCM2 - , and ICAP - 1 – depleted cells , the traction forces redistributed to central patches , consistent with the relocalization of pMLC and zyxin . There - fore , CCM proteins regulate the shape of endothelial cells , the architecture of their actomyosin cytoskeleton , and the distribu - tion of their traction forces by controlling  1 integrin activity . CCM1 and CCM2 control  1 integrin – dependent FN remodeling Upon ROCK - dependent traction by the actomyosin cytoskel - eton ,  5  1 FN - engaged integrins translocate toward the cell body , allowing unfolding of FN cryptic sites and FN polymeriza - tion in fibers ( Clark et al . , 2005 ) . Having shown that activated  1 integrin and cell tension are redistributed over the cell surface upon loss of CCM1 or CCM2 , we analyzed the capacity of HUVECs to remodel glass - coated FN in vitro . After 24 h , CT HUVECs had woven a network of FN fibers with a hairy appear - ance ( Fig . 3 D ) , whereas CCM1 - or CCM2 - silenced HUVECs silenced similarly to ICAP - 1 – depleted cells generated more but shorter streaks of FN all over the cell ventral face underneath the numerous  1 integrin focal adhesions . These streaks had grown following the direction of the actin stress fibers , resulting in a linear array of parallel and short lines of FN ( Fig . 3 D ) . On a confluent monolayer after 48 h of culture , these defects led to a network of straight and parallel FN fibers , whereas CT HUVECs generated a mesh - patterned network of interlaced FN under blebbistatin treatment to relax the actomyosin cytoskele - ton and eliminate any contribution of cortical cytoskeleton ten - sion to  1 integrin activation . CCM1 - and CCM2 - silenced HUVECs displayed a higher percentage of activated  1 integrin than CT cells on their cell surface similarly to ICAP - 1 – silenced HUVECs , consistently with their loss in ICAP - 1 ( Fig . 2 A ) . When sparsely adhered onto FN , these CCM1 - , CCM2 - , and ICAP - 1 – silenced cells formed more  1 integrin – containing adhesions on their ventral surface . Whereas CT HUVECs dis - played limited peripheral staining for activated  1 integrin , three times more CCM1 - or CCM2 - depleted HUVECs contained lon - ger linear tracks of activated  1 integrin all over the ventral side of the cell ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) , similarly to ICAP - 1 – depleted HUVECs . Talin colocalized with  1 integrin in these focal adhesions , con - sistent with an increase in  1 integrin signaling ( Fig . S2 ) . These results establish that CCM proteins regulate  1 integrin activa - tion and spatial distribution on the cell surface . CCM1 and CCM2 require  1 integrin to activate RhoA CCM1 and CCM2 loss results in a higher level of RhoAGTP , which is deleterious for the endothelial permeability barrier ( Whitehead et al . , 2009 ; Borikova et al . , 2010 ; Stockton et al . , 2010 ) .  1 integrin – dependent cell adhesion to ECM is known as a signal for RhoA activation and cell contractility ( Huveneers and Danen , 2009 ) . We wondered whether increased RhoA acti - vation could be mediated by increased  1 integrin signaling upon CCM loss . We therefore performed RhoAGTP pull - down assays in conditions where ICAP - 1 – and CCM1 / 2 - silenced HUVECs were additionally silenced for  1 integrin . We con - firmed that loss of CCM1 and CCM2 led to increased RhoAGTP ( Fig . 2 D ) . In addition , ICAP - 1 loss also increased RhoA acti - vation by a similar fold ( Fig . 2 D ) Supplemental silencing of  1 integrin ( Fig . S3 A ) completely abolished this increase of RhoAGTP ( Fig . 2 E ) , which remained at the level of CT cells ( Fig . S3 B ) . Our results show the crucial role of  1 integrin in RhoA activation upon ICAP - 1 and CCM protein loss . CCM1 and CCM2 control the architecture of  1 integrin – dependent actin cytoskeleton and the distribution of cellular traction forces Adhesion of cells to ECM allows the generation of traction forces by the contractile actomyosin cytoskeleton ( Huveneers and Danen , 2009 ; Parsons et al . , 2010 ) . Actomyosin contractil - ity is up - regulated in CCM - depleted cells as a result of increased RhoA activation and ROCK - dependent myosin phosphoryla - tion ( Whitehead et al . , 2009 ; Borikova et al . , 2010 ; Stockton et al . , 2010 ) . Sparse HUVECs depleted in CCM1 , CCM2 , or ICAP - 1 were more elongated than CT HUVECs and displayed transver - sal bundles of actin fibers connected to  1 integrin – containing focal adhesions ( Fig . 2 , F and H ) . Additional depletion in  1 integrin blocked the formation of these actin bundles and rescued the wild - type cell shape and cortical actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 2 , F and H ) . This effect was specific for  1 integrin depletion ; additional  3 integrin knock - down had no effect ( Fig . 2 , F and H ) .  1 integrin depletion alone did not strongly modify the architecture 549 Microenvironment remodeling by  1 integrin in CCM • Faurobert et al . Figure 2 . CCM1 / 2 proteins control RhoA - dependent actin cytoskeleton organization by regulating  1 integrin activation . ( A ) Flow cytofluorometry using 9EG7 shows an increase in  1 integrin activation upon silencing of CCM1 , CCM2 , or ICAP - 1 . Error bars are means ± SEM ( n = 4 ) . ( B ) HUVECs depleted in ICAP - 1 , CCM1 , or CCM2 spread for 1 h on low density of FN displayed more and larger  1 integrin containing focal adhesions ( stained with 9EG7 antibody ) localized all over their ventral face . Bar , 5 µm . ( C ) Quantification of the percentage of cells displaying central plaques . Error bars are means ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . ( D and E ) Quantification of RhoA activation upon ICAP - 1 , CCM1 , or CCM2 depletion alone ( D ) or with additional  1 integrin silencing ( E ) by RhoGTP pull - downs . Error bars are means ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . RhoG - LISA measurements show that the level of RhoAGTP returned to that of CT upon ICAP - 1 or CCM1 / 2 depletion in absence of  1 integrin ( see Fig . S3 B ) . ( F ) Transversal actin bundles were observed in elongated HUVECs upon depletion of ICAP - 1 , CCM1 , or CCM2 spread on FN for 4 h . Additional siRNA depletion of  1 but not of  3 integrin ( Fig . S3 A ) abolished their formation . ( G ) As sparse cells , confluent HUVECs displayed transversal actin stress fibers and their junctional VE - cadherin and  - catenin stainings appeared thinner and discontinuous ( see Fig . S4 ) . Transversal actin fibers were abolished upon additional depletion in  1 but not in  3 integrin . ( H ) Quantification of the percentage of sparse cells with transversal actin bundles in the absence or presence of additional  1 or  3 integrin depletion . Error bars are means ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 005 ; * * * , P < 0 . 0005 . JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 550 Figure 3 . CCM1 / 2 proteins control  1 integrin – dependent distribution of traction forces and FN remodeling . ( A ) pMLC and zyxin delocalized from the peripheral focal adhesions to transversal actin stress fibers upon depletion in ICAP - 1 , CCM1 , or CCM2 after 4 h of spreading . Bar , 5 µm . These images are presented again in Fig . S3 C , where it is shown that pMLC and zyxin relocalized to the cell periphery upon additional silencing of  1 integrin but not of  3 integrin . ( B ) Representative traction forces maps obtained by TFM . Forces were delocalized from the cell periphery to all over the ventral face upon CCM depletion . ( C ) Quantification of the percentage of cells displaying central traction forces . Between 14 and 23 cells of each were analyzed . Error bars are means ± SEM ( n = 2 ) . Similar fold - increase of the percentage of cells bearing central forces was measured for CCM1 - depleted HUVECs ( n = 1 ; not depicted ) . Bar , 10 µm . Remodeling of glass - coated FN was studied on sparse cells after 24 h ( D ) and on confluent cells after 48 h ( E ) . Bars , 5 µm . FN staining in the yellow box in E is magnified to highlight the linear pattern of parallel FN fibers produced by ICAP - 1 / CCM - depleted HUVECs . Bars , 2 µm . These data are representative of more than three independent experiments . 551 Microenvironment remodeling by  1 integrin in CCM • Faurobert et al . endothelial cells , extra domain A – containing cellular FN ( cFN ) , total FN , and with collagen III . The first striking result was the presence around CCM lesions of large amounts of EDA cFN , a marker of angiogenic vessels , which had invaded the neuronal tissue , whereas barely detectable around normal blood vessels ( Fig . 4 A ) . A profusion of FN fibrils were wrapped around the CCM1 lesion , whereas a uniform and weak FN signal was detected around the adjacent unaffected part of the blood vessel ( Fig . 4 B ) or around blood vessels of CT animals ( Fig . 4 D ) . Similar numer - ous FN fibrils were present around CCM2 lesions ( Fig . 4 C ) . FN fibrillogenesis is a critical regulator of collagen deposition ( Velling et al . , 2002 ) . Consistently , strong collagen III staining colocalized with FN fibers around CCM lesions ( Fig . 4 , B and C ) , whereas staining was barely detectable around blood vessels of CT ani - mals ( Fig . 4 D ) . Thus , aberrant FN deposition and remodeling were associated with the lesions in iCCM1 and iCCM2 models . FN deposition was then analyzed around ICAP - 1 – deficient blood vessels . After staining of whole - mount ear outer leaflet fibers ( Fig . 3 E ) . Additional silencing of  1 integrin in endothelial cells depleted in ICAP - 1 or CCM1 / 2 and inhibition of ROCK using Y27632 totally suppressed FN fibrillogenesis ( unpublished data ) , confirming that the defect in fibrillogenesis depended on the activity of  1 integrin and ROCK . Therefore , we showed that by controlling the architecture of  1 integrin – dependent adhesions and cell traction forces , CCM proteins function as regulators of FN assembly in vitro . Human and mouse CCM lesions show foci of multilayered or disrupted basal lamina surrounded by a collagenous interstitial matrix ( Wong et al . , 2000 ; Clatterbuck et al . , 2001 ; Chan et al . , 2011 ; McDonald et al . , 2011 ) . Because FN fibrillogenesis is re - quired for ECM assembly ( Schwarzbauer and DeSimone , 2011 ) , we asked whether FN deposition and remodeling would be af - fected in CCM lesions , as for in vitro cultures . For this , endothelial - specific knock - out of CCM1 and CCM2 was induced in mice by tamoxifen ( iCCM1 and iCCM2 ; Boulday et al . , 2011 ) . Brain sections were labeled with antibodies against PECAM to label Figure 4 . Abnormal FN deposition around mouse CCM1 or CCM2 lesions and ICAP - 1 – deficient blood vessels . ( A ) Sections of iCCM2 were labeled with total FN , cFN , and PECAM . CCM lesions are annotated by asterisks and normal blood vessels by arrows . cFN was abundant around CCM lesions , but barely detectable around peri - lesion blood vessels . Bar , 50 µm . ( B and C ) Numerous FN fibers ap - peared around the lesions ( B , arrow ) , whereas FN signal was weak and diffuse around un - affected peri - lesion vessels ( B , asterisk ) or CT blood vessels ( D ) . Strong collagen III staining was detected around CCM lesions but not around unaffected peri - lesion vessels or CT blood vessels . n = 3 mice for iCCM1 , n = 6 mice for iCCM2 . Bars , 10 µm . ( E ) Projections of confocal z - stacks of whole - mount of ear blood vessels of ICAP - 1 + / + and  /  mice immunostained for PECAM and FN . Blood had been washed out by intracardiac perfusion of PBS . The plot of intensity of the FN signal over the surface delineated by the yellow square is presented in the middle . Increased FN depo - sition as a mixture of soluble and thin fibrils around ICAP - 1  /  blood vessels differed from the discrete FN fibers around ICAP - 1 + / + blood vessels . n = 3 from two litters for each genotype . Bars , 10 µm . JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 552 Figure 5 . Defective ECM organization increases cellular tension and decreases barrier function of naive HUVECs . ( A ) ICAP - 1 - , CCM1 - , or CCM2 - depleted HUVECs were seeded at confluency on FN - coated slides . Cells were removed 48 h later by a triton / ammonium hydroxide treatment . Naive HUVECs were seeded on these decellularized remodeled matrices . ( B and C ) FN and ColIV staining of decellularized matrices remodeled in the absence ( B ) or presence of FUD ( C ) . Note the linearity of FN fibers and ColIV in ICAP - 1 - and CCM1 / 2 - depleted conditions . Bars , 1 µm . ( D ) Quantification of the percentage of naive HUVECs with central  1 integrin focal adhesions after 1 h of spreading . ( E ) Quantification of the percentage of naive HUVECs with transversal stress fibers 553 Microenvironment remodeling by  1 integrin in CCM • Faurobert et al . show that the structure of the ECM remodeled by CCM - depleted HUVECs impacts the adhesive and contractile behaviors of naive HUVECs . The array of parallel and straight fibers of FN is suffi - cient to increase  1 integrin – dependent cell contractility . To determine whether the feedback loop between remod - eled ECM and cell contractility impacts cell – cell junctions , naive HUVECs were seeded at confluency on these matrices and labeled 24 h later for  catenin and actin . As observed at low cell density , CCM – ICAP - 1 KD matrices generated a higher percentage of cells with transversal actin stress fibers associated with a thin  catenin staining at cell – cell junctions as compared with CT matrix ( Fig . 5 F ) . Statistical analysis confirmed that  catenin staining was significantly thinner on CCM – ICAP - 1 KD matrices ( Fig . 5 G ) . Functionally , the electrical impedance of the monolayer of naive HUVECs was reduced equally for cells plated on the CCM or ICAP - 1 KD matrices compared with the CT ( Fig . 5 , H and I ) . Therefore , the morphological defects in cell – cell junctions induced by CCM – ICAP - 1 KD matrices were associated with a reduced endothelial barrier function . When naive HUVECs were plated on matrices remodeled with FUD , the difference in the electrical resistance between CT and CCM KD matrices was strongly reduced ( Fig . 5 , H and I ) , highlight - ing the crucial effect of the geometry of ECM remodeling in cell permeability . Consistently , the small stiches of FN remod - eled by CT HUVECs in presence of FUD gave rise to a defec - tive matrix for cell – cell junctions as CCM KD matrices did . Altogether , our results show that the organization of FN fibers impacts the endothelial cell contractility and permeabil - ity barrier function . These results support the idea that aberrant remodeling of FN around CCM lesions feeds back onto endothe - lial cells to worsen morphological and functional defects gener - ated by CCM 1 or 2 loss . ICAP - 1 – deficient blood vessels display ultrastructural ECM defects and increased permeability To investigate whether ICAP - 1 destabilization upon CCM loss could contribute to the production of an abnormal microenvi - ronment around CCM lesions , we examined icap - 1  /  blood vessel walls at the ultrastructural level by transmission electron microscopy . Fig . 6 , A – C , shows retinal and choroidal vessel ultra - structures . The icap - 1  /  retinal capillaries were frequently more dilated than the icap - 1 + / + ones ( Fig . 6 A ) , despite pericyte cov - erage . The dense structure of the basal lamina around capillar - ies or venules was locally disrupted , appearing lamellated and spotty ( Fig . 6 A ) , torn ( Fig . 6 B ) , or interrupted by large vacu - oles ( Fig . S5 A ) . Multilayering of basal lamina directly apposed onto the endothelium was also observed around the fenestrated choroidal icap - 1  /  capillary ( Fig . 6 C ) and around a retinal icap - 1  /  artery ( Fig . S5 B ) . Whereas no structural defect in cell – cell junctions was detected and tight junctions were found with PECAM and FN antibodies , a well - organized network of discrete FN fibrils was detected around the blood vasculature of icap - 1 + / + mice , as shown on projections of confocal z - stack images ( Fig . 4 E ) . Surface plot analysis of the FN staining in the square highlights the distribution of well - separated peaks of fluorescence corresponding to discrete FN fibrils . FN was dif - ferently deposited around icap - 1  /  blood vessels ( Fig . 4 E ) . The overall intensity of the labeling was higher than that of icap - 1 + / + blood vessels , corresponding to an increased secre - tion of FN around ICAP - 1 – deficient blood vessels , as observed around CCM lesions . The FN labeling consisted of more numer - ous FN fibrils over a higher background of soluble FN than in CT vessels . Therefore , our in vitro and in vivo results show that CCM1 and CCM2 , most likely through ICAP - 1 regulation , control  1 integrin – dependent FN remodeling . ECM organization feeds back onto endothelial cell tension and barrier function To ensure homeostasis , cells adapt their contractile behavior to external tension . We asked whether aberrant FN fibrillogenesis by CCM - depleted endothelial cells could favor the development of CCM lesions as already described in cancer or vascular dis - eases ( Larsen et al . , 2006 ) . For this , remodeled ECM from CCM - depleted HUVECs was presented to naive HUVECs to test its capacity to modify their contractile behavior and junctional functionality . CCM1 / 2 - and ICAP - 1 – silenced HUVECs were cultured for 48 h on FN - coated plates to allow FN remodeling . The cells were removed by a triton / ammonium hydroxide treatment , and naive HUVECs were seeded on the resulting decellularized ECM , which were called CCM KD matrices ( Fig . 5 A ) . As shown in Fig . 3 , FN matrices generated by CCM - or ICAP - 1 – depleted HUVECs were made of parallel and linear fibers compared with the network of woven fibers in the CT matrix ( Fig . 5 B ) . FN is a scaffold for many proteins of the ECM ( Sottile and Hocking , 2002 ) . As such , collagen IV deposition followed that of FN ( Fig . 5 B ) , demonstrating the more global effect of FN remodeling on the ECM structure . In additional experiments , FN remodeling was inhibited using FUD to study the effect of ECM structure rather than composition through inhibition of its polymerization in fiber ( Tomasini - Johansson et al . , 2001 ) . At the dose used in these experiments , inhibition was only partial , causing the poly - merization of small and linear stiches of FN in all conditions , in CT matrices similarly to CCM or ICAP - 1 - KD ones ( Fig . 5 C ) . Strikingly , the percentage of naive HUVECs with central  1 integrin – dependent focal adhesions and pMLC - decorated transversal actin stress fibers increased when they were plated on CCM1 / 2 or ICAP - 1 KD matrices , compared with the CT matrix ( Fig . 5 , D and E ) . Using FUD as an ECM disorganizer , FUD treat - ment of CT matrix increased the percentage of cells with central focal adhesions and transversal stress fibers to a level compara - ble to CCM – ICAP - 1 KD matrices ( Fig . 5 , D and 5E ) . Our results after 4 h of spreading . ( F )  - catenin and actin staining of confluent naive HUVECs on the remodeled matrices after 24 h . Bars , 5 µm . ( G ) Quantification of  - catenin staining thickness showing thinner junctions of CCM KD matrices . ( H ) Time - course measurement of the electrical impedance of a monolayer of naive HUVECs on these matrices . The data shown are from a single representative experiment out of three repeats . ( I ) Normalized impedance to that on CT matrix showing a significant decrease of monolayer resistance barrier on CCM KD matrices due to structural changes in FN remodeling . Error bars are ± SEM ( n = 3 ) . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 005 ; * * * , P < 0 . 0005 using GLMM with Tukey’s test . JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 554 neither from icap - 1  /  mice blood vessels nor from icap - 1 + / + ( Fig . S5 C ) , but the diffusion of the 10 - kD dextran differed signif - icantly between icap - 1  /  and wild - type blood vessels ( Fig . 6 D ) . Indeed , the diffusion rate in the 5 - min after injection was two - fold higher for icap - 1  /  mice than for wild - type littermates ( Fig . 6 E ) , indicating a higher permeability of icap - 1  /  blood vessels to small molecules . Thus , the ultrastructural defects of the basal lamina of ICAP - 1 – deficient blood vessels were accompanied by an increased permeability , demonstrating that ICAP - 1 has a role in maintaining in vivo barrier function in the endothelium . ICAP - 1 is required for the morphological integrity of blood vessels To evaluate the contribution of ICAP - 1 to blood vessel morpho - genesis in vivo , we studied the blood vasculature of ICAP - 1 knock - out mice . Contrary to constitutive or endothelial - specific between endothelial cells ( Fig . 6 C , arrow ) , zones of detachment of the endothelial cell from its basal lamina were observed ( Fig . 6 C , arrowhead ) . The interstitial ECM around the icap - 1  /  cho - roidal capillary was also abnormally enlarged and less dense in fibers than in the wild - type vessel ( Fig . 6 C ) . These ultrastruc - tural defects are strikingly reminiscent of those around human and mouse CCM lesions ( Wong et al . , 2000 ; Clatterbuck et al . , 2001 ; Chan et al . , 2011 ; McDonald et al . , 2011 ) , supporting the idea that ICAP - 1 loss upon CCM1 or CCM2 depletion could cause the aberrant ECM remodeling around CCM lesions . As the ECM barrier accounts for 50 % of the total barrier function of blood vessels ( Mehta and Malik , 2006 ) , we next asked whether these ultrastructural ECM defects of ICAP - 1 – deficient blood vessels were associated with increased permeability . The permeability of icap - 1  /  blood vessels was measured by mon - itoring the extravasation of fluorescent 10 - and 70 - kD dextran from blood vessels to the ear tissue . The 70 - kD dextran diffused Figure 6 . Ultrastructural defects of the basal lamina and interstitial ECM around ICAP - 1 – deficient blood vessels are associated with increased permeability to small molecules . ( A ) Transmission electron micrographs of reti - nal capillaries showing dilation of ICAP - 1  /  capillary compared with ICAP + / + . Bar , 1 µm . Enlargements of the yellow square show that basal lamina ( BL ) around ICAP - 1  /  capil - lary present zones of multilayering due to dispersion of the dense matter and zones of accumulation of matter in spots ( arrows ) . EC , endothelial cell ; P , pericyte . Bar , 0 . 5 µm . ( B ) Arrows indicate zones of tearing of the basal lamina around an ICAP - 1  /  venule . SMC , smooth muscle cell . Bar , 1 µm . ( C ) Fenes - trated choroidal capillaries showing multilay - ering of the basal lamina ( BL ) juxtaposed to EC and enlargement of the interstitial ECM , which appears scattered around ICAP - 1  /  capillary . Arrowhead points to detachment of the EC from its BL . EC – EC junctions are present ( arrow ) . Bar , 1 µm . n = 4 for each genotype from three litters . ( D ) Gallery of ear pictures over time under a fluorescence microscope after injection of Alexa Fluor 546 / 10 - kD dex - tran in the blood circulation . See the progres - sive increase in fluorescence of the ear tissue in ICAP - 1  /  mouse compared with wild - type littermate ( yellow rectangle ) . Bar , 100 µm . ( E ) Diffusion rate of the 10 - kD dextran was cal - culated between 90 and 300 s after injection . Error bars are means ± SEM ( n = 5 for each genotype from five litters for + / + and two litters for  /  ) . * , P < 0 . 05 one - tailed paired t test . 555 Microenvironment remodeling by  1 integrin in CCM • Faurobert et al . magnifications ( Fig . 7 E ) confirmed the tortuosity of the ICAP - 1 – deficient vessels and their irregular diameters . Neverthe - less , smooth muscle cells and pericytes were present around icap - 1  /  blood vessels ( Fig . 6 E ) . 3D reconstruction of con - focal images highlighted the dramatic malformations of tubes , which presented bulges and constrictions and partial flattening along their long axis ( Video 1 ) . Therefore , ICAP - 1 is required for correct vascular morphogenesis . Discussion CCM proteins inhibit Rho / ROCK - dependent actomyosin con - tractility to stabilize VE - cadherin – dependent cell – cell junctions and maintain vascular integrity ( Glading et al . , 2007 ; Whitehead et al . , 2009 ; Borikova et al . , 2010 ; Stockton et al . , 2010 ) . Here , we demonstrate that increased Rho / ROCK - dependent cell con - tractility upon CCM1 / 2 loss results from higher  1 integrin activation subsequently to ICAP - 1 protein destabilization . Redis - tribution of cellular traction forces impairs FN remodeling . In line , ultrastructural defects of the basal lamina are associated with aberrant FN remodeling around CCM lesions and ICAP - 1 blood vessels . Remarkably , the aberrant ECM organization deletion of CCM1 or CCM2 in mice , germline deletion of ICAP - 1 does not lead to embryonic lethality , but mice reach adulthood with more or less perinatal mortality depending on their genetic background ( Bouvard et al . , 2007 ) . Whereas histological analy - ses of the brains of icap - 1  /  mice did not reveal CCM lesions ( unpublished data ) , macroscopic observations indicated pleio - tropic defects in the topography of the vasculature and in the integrity of the blood vessels of adult ICAP - 1 – deficient mice . First , dissection of their skin under anesthesia generated mas - sive bleeding . Second , hemorrhages and edemas were frequent on organs like kidneys or ovaries . As such , 8 out of 10 icap - 1  /  mice had hemorrhagic kidneys ( Fig . S5 D ) , suggesting their blood vessels are fragile . Their vena cava was often dilated ( Fig . S5 E ) . Finally , their mesenteric veins were more branched ( Fig . 7 , A and B ) . We then focused on the outer ear tissue to analyze blood vessel morphology . Fig . 7 C shows whole - mount PECAM immunostaining of the outer leaflet of the ear . Blood vasculature of icap - 1  /  mice presented a chaotic arrangement of dilated and tortuous vessels with undulations , loops , and irregular diam - eters . Quantification of the diameters revealed a shift of the popu - lation of ICAP - 1 – deficient vessels toward vessels larger than wild - type ones ( Fig . 7 D ) . Confocal image projections at higher Figure 7 . ICAP - 1 – deficient mice present dilated , more branched and tortuous blood vessels . ( A ) Mesenteric veins of ICAP - 1  /  mice were dilated and more branched than in their wild - type littermates . Bar , 5 mm . ( B ) Quan - tification of the number of final branches connecting the intestine per mesenteric vein . Points correspond to the number of branches of an individual vein and horizontal bars are the means per genotype ( ICAP - 1 + / + , n = 5 mice from five litters ; ICAP - 1  /  , n = 4 mice from three litters ) . * , P < 0 . 05 . ( C ) Projections of confocal z - stacks of ear whole - mount stain - ing of blood vessels with PECAM . Bar , 100 µm . ( D ) Histogram of the distribution of blood ves - sel diameter categories ( ICAP - 1 + / + , n = 4 mice from three litters ; ICAP - 1  /  , n = 5 mice from two litters ) . ( E ) Projections of confocal z - stacks of ear whole - mount staining of blood vessels with PECAM , smooth muscle actin ( SMA ) , and desmin . Bar , 10 µm . JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 556 and cell contractility ( Huveneers et al . , 2008 ) . Here , we show that  1 integrin is required for increased RhoA activation upon CCM1 / 2 loss and for the appearance of actin stress fibers . Several GEFs and GAPs of RhoA are regulated by  1 integrin and me - chanical forces ( Guilluy et al . , 2011 ) ; further studies should de - termine the ones involved in this context . We propose that , in physiological condition , the CCM complex maintains  1 integ - rin activation low to block RhoA - dependent cell contractility , and to prevent its deleterious effects on cell – cell junction stabil - ity , cell polarity , and in fine the quiescence of the vessel . As a result of dysregulated  1 integrin activation and cell contractility , FN fibrillogenesis does not proceed normally upon CCM protein loss . Depleted cells generate linear and parallel FN fibers instead of the interlaced and woven fibers of CT cells . As the polymerization of FN in long and wavy fibers requires the propagation of peripheral forces toward the cell body ( Lemmon et al . , 2009 ) , dysregulation of the spatio - temporal propagation of forces in cells silenced for ICAP - 1 or CCM1 / 2 likely causes abnormal FN fibrillogenesis . In vivo FN deposition around mouse CCM lesions and ICAP - 1 – deficient blood vessels is consistently abnormal . It is composed of more numerous FN fibers over a higher background of soluble FN dimers . FN fibers provide a scaffold for matrix proteins , including fibrillar collagens and collagen IV , and orches - trate their assembly ( Sottile et al . , 2007 ; Stratman et al . , 2009 ) . Fibers of collagen III colocalized with the FN fibrils around CCM lesions , whereas they were almost absent around normal blood vessels . Moreover , these remodeling defects are associ - ated with increased production of EDA cFN . Cellular FN vari - ants EDA and EDB are markers of angiogenic vessels during embryonic development or tumoral angiogenesis ( Rybak et al . , 2007 ; Van Obberghen - Schilling et al . , 2011 ; Booth et al . , 2012 ) . Collagen III , EDA , and EDB cFN are also expressed during fibro - sis ( Theodossiou et al . , 2006 ; Booth et al . , 2012 ) . FN - driven fibro - sis around CCM lesions could lead to an inflammatory response and damage the peripheral neuronal tissue ( Khan et al . , 2012 ) . These morphological ECM defects are correlated with abnormal ultrastructure of the basal lamina and interstitial ECM . We found multilayering of the basal lamina and enlargement of the intersti - tial ECM in ICAP - 1 – deficient vessels . This is reminiscent of human and mouse CCM lesions ( Wong et al . , 2000 ; Clatterbuck et al . , 2001 ; Chan et al . , 2011 ; McDonald et al . , 2011 ) and points to ICAP - 1 dysfunctions as a cause for abnormal basal lamina around CCM - deficient blood vessels . ICAP - 1 deficiency leads to vascular defects that partially recapitulate those in endothelial CCM1 / 2 - deficient mice . Con - trary to ccm 1 and ccm 2 constitutive or endothelial - specific knock - out mice , vascular defects upon ICAP - 1 deficiency do not lead to developmental lethality or cerebral cavernoma lesions ( Whitehead et al . , 2004 , 2009 ; Boulday et al . , 2009 ; Kleaveland et al . , 2009 ) . As ICAP - 1 can complex with CCM1 or  1 integrin ( Liu et al . , 2013 ) , it is likely that ICAP - 1 and CCM1 have com - mon and distinct functions . Contrary to ccm 1 and ccm 2 knock - out mice , for which both CCM1 and ICAP - 1 are lost , CCM1 is present in ICAP - 1 – deficient animals , to a lesser extent though than in wild - type animals ( 25 % of wild type ) . It is possible that the remaining level of CCM1 protein in ICAP - 1  /  mice is generated by CCM1 / 2 - depleted cells feeds back onto the cells to increase their contractility and decrease endothelial barrier function . Thus , up - regulation of  1 integrin activation partici - pates in the progression of CCM lesions by destabilizing intercel - lular junctions through increased cell contractility and aberrant extracellular matrix remodeling . CCM1 and CCM2 are involved in the fine regulation of  1 integrin activation through ICAP - 1 stability CCM1 and CCM2 regulate common processes probably as a protein complex , and their loss leads to indistinguishable phe - notypes ( Chan et al . , 2010 ; Stockton et al . , 2010 ; Boulday et al . , 2011 ; Chan et al . , 2011 ) . ICAP - 1 is a direct partner of CCM1 that binds to CCM2 , and both CCM1 and ICAP - 1 have been identified by mass spectrometry associated with CCM2 ( Hilder et al . , 2007 ) . CCM2 sequesters ICAP - 1 – CCM1 in the cytoplasm ( Zawistowski et al . , 2005 ) . Using siRNA silencing , knock - out animals , and ICAP - 1 lifetime , we show these three proteins have stabilizing effects . Extending an in vitro study on the sta - bilization of ICAP - 1 by CCM1 ( Zhang et al . , 2008 ) , we show that ICAP - 1 and CCM1 stabilize each other and are stabilized by CCM2 . As observed in ccm2  /  embryos , ICAP - 1 and CCM1 are likely lost in CCM1 and CCM2 lesions , providing a mecha - nistic rationale for their indistinguishable phenotypes . ICAP - 1 keeps  1 integrin in its inactivated form by com - peting with kindlin and talin for binding to  1 integrin cytoplas - mic tail ( Bouvard et al . , 2003 ; Millon - Frémillon et al . , 2008 ; Brunner et al . , 2011 ) . Here , we show that CCM1 and CCM2 control  1 integrin activation . In the pathological condition upon CCM1 / 2 loss ,  1 integrin overactivation most likely comes from the destabilization of ICAP - 1 protein . A recent article suggests on the contrary that loss of CCM1 leads to inhibition of  1 inte - grin activation ( Liu et al . , 2013 ) . In support of this , no ICAP - 1 destabilization is observed upon CCM1 loss . This discrepancy with our results probably comes from their use of an endothelial cell line EA . hy926 instead of primary HUVECs . This perma - nent cell line is a fusion between HUVECs and a human carci - noma cell line ( Edgell et al . , 1983 ) . EA . hy926 cells express much more ICAP - 1 and CCM1 than HUVECs and , inversely , dramatically less  1 integrin on their cell surface ( unpublished data ) . These disruptions in the balance between the three part - ners are likely to have profound artifact effects on  1 integrin activation . In the physiological condition when both ICAP - 1 and CCM1 are present , the emerging picture is that the CCM1 – ICAP - 1 complex is presented to  1 integrin . ICAP - 1 binds to  1 integrin releasing CCM1 ( Liu et al . , 2013 ) , which can then regulate cell – cell junction formation and / or stabilization . CCM1 / 2 proteins regulate intracellular tension and ECM remodeling through control of  1 integrin activation Actomyosin contractility is up - regulated in CCM - depleted cells as a result of increased RhoA activation and ROCK - dependent myosin phosphorylation ( Whitehead et al . , 2009 ; Borikova et al . , 2010 ; Stockton et al . , 2010 ) . It is known that  1 integrin – dependent cell adhesion to ECM is a signal for RhoA activation 557 Microenvironment remodeling by  1 integrin in CCM • Faurobert et al . cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesion ( Burute and Thery , 2012 ) . Be - cause  1 integrin is a master organizer of actin in CCM1 / 2 - depleted cells , it represents a good therapeutic target to decrease vascular leak in CCM lesions . Several inhibitors of activated  1 integrin under clinical trials in cancer therapy ( Barkan and Chambers , 2011 ) could be tested on the CCM1 / 2 - inducible mouse models . Moreover , we show that aberrant ECM remodeling in an array of straight FN and collagen fibers is linked to increased cell contractility and  1 integrin – dependent adhesion upon CCM1 / 2 depletion . Interestingly , highly aligned and organized collagen fibers are also found around tumors in vivo and generate a stiff mi - croenvironment favorable for tumor cell invasiveness ( Gaggioli et al . , 2007 ; Provenzano et al . , 2008 ; Goetz et al . , 2011 ) . Further experiments are ongoing to determine whether such ECM remod - eling stiffens the microenvironment around CCM lesions and sufficient for it to perform its ICAP - 1 – independent functions , allowing developmental angiogenesis to proceed and preventing the formation of CCM lesions in born animals . Cell – cell junctions are regulated by a  1 integrin – dependent loop between microenvironment and cell contractility downstream of CCM – ICAP - 1 complex Increased cellular contractility is deleterious for VE - cadherin – dependent adherens junctions , endothelial barrier function , and CCM lesion formation . RhoA or ROCK inhibitors decrease vascu - lar leaks in CCM1 and CCM2 heterozygous animals ( Whitehead et al . , 2009 ; Stockton et al . , 2010 ) and slow down the maturation of CCM lesions from isolated caverns to large multi - cavernous hemorrhagic structures ( McDonald et al . , 2012 ) . Interestingly , actin dynamics has a prominent role in the cross talk between Figure 8 .  1 activation upon loss in CCM1 or 2 drives a loop between endothelial cell contractility and ECM with deleterious effect on cell – cell junctions . In a quiescent vessel , ICAP - 1 maintains low  1 integrin activation . Endothelial cells are well joined and VE - cadherin adherens junctions are stabilized by a cytoplasmic adaptor complex that recruits junctional actomyosin cytoskeleton . Upon CCM1 or CCM2 depletion , ICAP - 1 protein is destabilized and lost .  1 integrin is activated and activates in turn RhoA / ROCK - dependent actin stress fiber formation . Increased  1 integrin activation and cell contractility result in aberrant remodeling of ECM in linear and parallel fibers onto which cells spread and flatten . A self - sustaining mechanical loop is initiated that increases intra - and external tensions destabilizing cell – cell junctions . JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 558 the Animal Care and Use Committee ( Comité d’éthique en expérimentation animale de Grenoble ) . The iCCM1 and iCCM2 P1 pups received a single intragastric injection of 20 µg tamoxifen as in Boulday et al . ( 2011 ) . Tamoxifen ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was diluted in sunflower oil / 10 % ethanol . Immunohistochemistry For ear whole - mount staining , the ears were dissected out with forceps , separating the dorsal and ventral leaflets and fixed overnight in 4 % paraformaldehyde ( Lebrin et al . , 2010 ) . The dorsal leaflet was pro - cessed for immunostaining with primary antibodies listed in Table S1 . After rinsing , coverslips were incubated with an appropriate Alexa Fluor – conjugated secondary antibody . The tissues were mounted in Mowiol / DAPI solution . Frozen brain sections ( 16 µm ) from iCCM1 and iCCM2 were post - fixed in acetone , blocked with BSA and goat serum , and immunostained with PECAM , FN , and collagen III as described previously ( Boulday et al . , 2011 ) . Z - stack images ( 0 . 5 - µm step ) were acquired on a confocal microscope ( LSM 510 ; Carl Zeiss ) with a Plan Apochromat 63× / 1 . 4 NA oil objective , DICIII , WD 180 . Z - stack projections were done using the LSM program . Quantifications of vessel branching and diameters Vessel branching was quantified on photographs of intestine mesenteric veins of icap - 1 + / + and icap - 1  /  mice using ImageJ software ( National Institutes of Health ) . The final number of branches was counted for each initial mesenteric vein . Vessel diameters were determined on projections of confocal z - stacks of ear whole - mount – stained blood vessels with PECAM at 20× . Images were normalized and more than 100 diameters per mouse were measured using ImageJ software . In vivo tracer diffusion imaging Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of ketamine ( 100 mg / kg body weight ) and domitor ( 8 mg / kg body weight ) and were placed supine on the platform of the MacroFluo imaging system ( Leica ) with their ear gen - tly stretched under a microscope slide . A mixture of lysine - fixable 70 kD dextran - FITC and 10 kD dextran – Alexa Fluor 546 ( Invitrogen ; 0 . 1 mg of each in 200 µl of PBS ) was injected intravenously into their tail vein . Fluor - escent images were acquired continuously for 15 min by a CCD camera ( ORCA II - BT - 512G ; Hamamatsu Photonics ) . Excitation was performed at 480 nm ( BP 480 / 40 - nm filter ) and 546 nm ( 515 – 560 nm ) . Fluorescence emission was detected simultaneously in the BP 527 / 30 - nm and LP 590 - nm channels for FITC and Alexa Fluor 546 , respectively . Transmission electron microscopy Samples were fixed overnight at 4°C in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde , 2 % parafor - maldehyde in sodium cacodylate buffer 0 . 1 M , pH 7 . 4 . After three washes in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate , pH 7 . 4 , specimens were post - fixed in 1 % osmium tetroxide , 0 . 1 M cacodylate , pH 7 . 4 , for 45 min , dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol , and embedded in epoxy resin . Ultra - thin 70 - nm sections stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate were observed with an electron microscope ( model CM120 , Philips ; Centre Technologique des Microstructures , University Lyon 1 , Villeurbanne , France ) . Cell culture and transfection HUVECs were obtained from Lonza and grown in EGM - 2 media supple - mented with 100 U / ml penicillin and 100 µg / ml streptomycin at 37°C in a 5 % CO 2 - humidified chamber according to the manufacturer’s instruc - tions . HUVECs ( 1 . 5 × 10 6 cells ) were transfected twice at 24 - h intervals with 20 nM siRNA and 45 µl lipofectamine RNAi max ( Invitrogen ) accord - ing to the manufacturer’s instructions . Cells were used the day after the second round of transfection . For  1 or  3 integrin silencing , 20 nM of siGENOME smart pool siRNA ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) were used in com - bination with CT , ICAP - 1 , CCM1 , or CCM2 siRNA and three rounds of transfection were performed . Table S2 shows the sequences of siRNA duplexes for CT , ICAP - 1 , and CCM1 ( Eurogentec ) . CCM2 siRNA are an ON - TARGET smart pool from Thermo Fisher Scientific . CHO ( Chinese hamster ovary ) cells were grown in DMEM ( PAA ) and transfected with Exgen ( Euromedex ) following the manufacturer’s instruc - tions , using pCDNA3 - ICAP - 1 vector with or without pcDNA - FLAG - CCM1 wild - type or N192 - Y195 / AA mutant ( Béraud - Dufour et al . , 2007 ) . Lifetime of ICAP - 1 protein measurement Transfected CHO cells were incubated with cycloheximide ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at 100 µg / ml with or without 10 µM of MG132 . After indicated times , cells were then lysed in RIPA buffer and protein concentration was mea - sured by BCA assay . Total proteins ( 20 µg ) were run on SDS - PAGE and immunoblotted as below . ICAP - 1 – deficient blood vessels . Using decellularized matrices remodeled by CCM - depleted endothelial cells , we show that the structure of the CCM1 / 2 KD matrices was responsible for increased cell contractility and decreased barrier function of the endothelial monolayer . It is likely that the higher external ten - sion imposed by the ECM feeds back onto the cells , enhancing their internal tension , and creates a self - sustaining mechanical loop as for tumoral cells ( DuFort et al . , 2011 ; Goetz et al . , 2011 ) . This loop is deleterious for the stability of VE - cadherin cell – cell junctions ( Fig . 8 ) . It has been shown accordingly that increased ECM stiffness inhibits cell – cell junction formation ( Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ; Tseng et al . , 2012 ) and enhances the response of the endothelium to permeability factors such as thrombin ( Krishnan et al . , 2011 ) . We propose that  1 integrin – dependent ECM remod - eling is an additional cue to the progression of CCM lesions . Lesions are mosaics of wild - type and mutated endothelial cells ( Pagenstecher et al . , 2009 ) . By mid - range propagation , this defect in ECM organization would have deleterious effects on mutant and adjacent wild - type endothelial cells and could be involved in the maturation of CCM lesions from small isolated caverns to large multi - cavernous hemorrhagic structures ( McDonald et al . , 2011 ) . Consistent with this model , pMLC staining becomes more intense upon CCM maturation , and ROCK inhibition by Fasudil reduces the size of mouse CCM1 lesions and their matu - ration into hemorrhagic lesions ( McDonald et al . , 2012 ) . There - fore , inhibition of FN fibrillogenesis with competing peptides or blocking antibodies could also be tested on the CCM1 / 2 - inducible mouse models . Altogether , our data show for the first time that in addition to regulating cell – cell adhesion , CCM proteins control the bio - mechanical dialogue of the endothelial cell with its surround - ing ECM through  1 integrin activation , and that this dialogue impacts cell – cell adhesion . The role of the CCM proteins in the cross talks between these different signaling pathways should be further studied to have a comprehensive view of their func - tion and to set up therapeutic treatments . Materials and methods Reagents and antibodies Bovine plasma fibronectin was purified by affinity chromatography of plasma on columns containing covalently coupled denatured collagen , and the bound fibronectin was eluted by 4 M urea according to the method already described ( Albigès - Rizo et al . , 1995 ; Engvall and Ruoslahti , 1977 ) . Rat tail collagen I was from BD . EBM medium and HUVEC growth factors were from Lonza . Table S1 lists the commercial antibodies used . Rabbit anti – ICAP - 1 serum was raised by immunizing rabbits with purified recombinant His - tagged ICAP - 1 ( aa 1 – 150 ) as antigen ( Millon - Frémillon et al . , 2008 ) . Polyclonal rabbit anti - CCM1 was raised against the recombinant CCM1 fragment 1 – 400 aa produced in Escherichia coli and affinity purified . A second polyclonal CCM1 antibody , in Lampugnani et al . ( 2010 ) , was also used . CCM2 polyclonal antibody was as in Boulday et al . ( 2011 ) . The pQE30 - FUD plasmid was a gift from D . Mosher ( University of Wisconsin - Madison , Madison , WI ) . Recombinant FUD was produced in E . coli and affinity purified . Mouse strain Mice with a targeted mutation on the ICAP - 1 locus ( Itgb1bp1 tm1ref ) were genotyped as previously reported ( Bouvard et al . , 2007 ) . Mice were bred in a CD1 background and adult homozygous mice ( 2 – 4 mo ) were gener - ated by crossing heterozygous mice . The present study conforms to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the Na - tional Institutes of Health ( Bethesda , MD ) ; the protocol was approved by 559 Microenvironment remodeling by  1 integrin in CCM • Faurobert et al . Preparation of decellularized remodeled matrices 60 , 000 silenced HUVECs were seeded on slides coated with FN at 6 µg / cm 2 and cultured for 48 h under normoxia ( 3 % O 2 ) in EGM - 2 media . In FUD conditions , recombinant FUD peptide was added at a final concentration of 500 nM in the media and added again 24 h after . Cells were then lysed with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 15 min on ice . Nuclei were removed by incubation with 50 mM ammonium hydroxide for 15 min on ice . Resulting decellularized matrices were extensively washed with PBS and used for subsequent plating with naive HUVECs . Quantification of the thickness of  - catenin junctional staining HUVECs were seeded at confluency and cultured for 48 h in EGM - 2 media containing 5 % FN - depleted serum . Images were acquired on a microscope ( Axio Imager ; Carl Zeiss ) at 40× . Surface and length of the junctional  - catenin staining for the entire image were measured using the integrated morphometric analyses of MetaMorph application and means were calcu - lated from values of five images . The thickness of  - catenin staining was obtained with the ratio surface / length . Electrical impedance measurements The xCELLigence real - time cell analyzer ( RTCA ) system ( Roche ) was used to measure electrical impedance over time . Changes in impedance of confluent endothelial cells reflect changes in barrier function ( Atienza et al . , 2006 ) . Remodeled matrices were produced in wells of E - plates 16 as described in the section dedicated to the preparation of decellu - larized remodeled matrices . 60 , 000 naive HUVECs were seeded on these plates ( 4 wells per condition ) in EGM - 2 media containing 5 % FN - depleted serum . Cell index was measured every 10 min . Normalized cell index was calculated after cells had adhered and spread ( 1 h 30 min time point ) . Western blot analysis Cells or ground - frozen mouse livers were lysed in Laemmli buffer , run on SDS - PAGE , and transferred on PVDF membranes . Immunological detection was achieved with HRP - conjugated secondary antibody . Peroxidase activ - ity was visualized by ECL ( West Pico signal ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) using a ChemiDoc MP imaging system ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . Densitometric quantification of the bands was performed using the Image Laboratory program ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . Statistical analysis Comparisons between groups were analyzed by Student’s two - tailed paired t test with a significance level of P < 0 . 05 . Alternatively , data were analyzed for statistical significance by GLMM with a Tukey’s multiple com - parison test . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows ICAP - 1 and CCM1 protein contents in CCM2 embryos and ICAP - 1 livers , respectively . Fig . S2 shows colocalization of talin with  1 integrin – dependent focal adhesions in ICAP - 1 – , CCM1 - , and CCM2 - depleted HUVECs . Fig . S3 shows the effect of  1 integrin silencing on RhoA activation and actin contractility of sparse HUVECs depleted in ICAP - 1 , CCM1 , or CCM2 . Fig . S4 shows VE - cadherin and  catenin staining on confluent HUVECs silenced for ICAP - 1 , CCM1 , and CCM2 . Fig . S5 shows pleiotropic vascular defects in ICAP - 1 – deficient mice associated with defects in the ultrastructure of the basal lamina . Video 1 shows 360° rotation mov - ies around ICAP - 1 + / + and ICAP - 1  /  blood vessels . Online supple - mental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201303044 / DC1 . Additional data are available in the JCB DataViewer at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201303044 . dv . We thank G . Chevalier , A . Grichine , J . Mazzega , A . Fertin , E . Gaget , and L . Marguerie for excellent technical assistance . We are indebted to O . Desta - ing , E . Planus , Zuzana MacekJílková , P . Rizo ( Fluoptics ) , M . Billaud , R . Fässler , and R . Pankov for scientific discussions . We deeply thank F . Chapon for her expertise in analyzing electron micrographs , H . Mertani for help with XCELLi - gence experiments , and A . Kawska for iconography . This work was funded by a CNRS PEPS grant ( to E . Faurobert ) , the European consortium ERANET ( to E . Tournier - Lasserve and C . Albiges - Rizo ) , the Leducq Fondation grant 07 CVD 02 Hemorrhagic Stroke ( to E . Tournier - Lasserve ) , the RTRA Nanoscience Foundation ( to M . Balland and C . Albiges - Rizo ) , and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale ( to E . Tournier - Lasserve ) . J . Lisowska is funded by la Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer . The C . Albiges - Rizo team is supported by LNCC as “Equipe labellisée Ligue 2010 . ” Quantitative RT - PCR ( qPCR ) Total RNA was extracted from cells using the NucleoSpin RNA II kit ( Macherey - Nagel ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . RNA ( 1 µg ) was re - verse transcribed using the SuperScript VILO kit ( Life Technologies ) . Quantitative real - time PCR was performed with GoTaq R QPCR Master Mix ( Promega ) in a 25 - µl reaction on a thermal cycler ( C - 1000 Touch ; Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . Product sizes were controlled by DNA gel electrophoresis and the melt curves were evaluated using CFX Manager ( Bio - Rad Labora - tories ) . Ct values were determined with the same software , and normaliza - tion was done with the house keeping genes GAPDH , RELA , or ATP50 , yielding very similar results . Expression levels of each target gene in the siRNA cells were calculated with GAPDH as reference gene and com - pared with control . All PCR primer sequences are listed in Table S3 . Cell spreading and immunofluorescence Transfected cells were trypsinized , treated with 1 mg / ml trypsin inhibitor ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and incubated in serum - free EBM - 2 / 1 % BSA for 30 min at 37°C . Sparse HUVECs ( 10 4 cells ) were incubated for different times at 37°C in 24 - well plates on slides coated with 0 . 3 µg / cm 2 ( 1 µg / ml ) of FN in EBM - 2 media containing 5 % FN - depleted serum to study inside - out sig - naling effect of protein deletion on cell adhesion to ECM ( Millon - Frémillon et al . , 2008 ) , and then fixed . Confluent HUVECs ( 3 × 10 5 cells ) were seeded in 24 - well plates on slides coated with 20 µg / ml FN and incubated for 48 h in supplemented EGM - 2 media , then for another 24 h in basal EBM - 2 con - taining 0 . 3 % BSA . Cells were immunostained as already described ( Millon - Frémillon et al . , 2008 ) . In brief , cells were fixed with 4 % PFA , permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 , and incubated with appropriate primary antibod - ies ( see list in Table S1 ) . After rinsing , coverslips were incubated with an appropriate Alexa Fluor – conjugated secondary antibody . The cells were mounted in Mowiol / DAPI solution and imaged on a microscope ( Axio Im - ager M2 ; Carl Zeiss ) equipped with a Plan Apochromat 63× / 1 . 4 NA oil objective , DICIII , WD 190 , and a camera ( 6 . 45 × 6 . 45 µm ,  10°C BRT ,  8 im / s ; AxioCam MRc , Carl Zeiss ) . Quantifications of the percentage of cells displaying central  1 inte - grin – containing FA or transversal actin fibers above the nucleus were done on more than 100 cells . Measurement of  1 integrin activation by flow cytometry Transfected HUVECs were harvested after trypsin treatment and incubated at 37°C for 15 min with 10 µM blebbistatin and then , with or without 0 . 5 mM MnCl 2 for 15 min on ice . 9EG7 antibody was added to the cell suspension at 1 : 100 and incubated for 30 min on ice . Cells were washed and labeled with fluorophore - conjugated secondary antibody ( Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti – rat ) . After final wash , cells were fixed in 4 % PFA for 10 min on ice , washed in PBS , and then analyzed using a flow cytometer ( LSR II ; BD ) . The integrin index activation was calculated as the mean fluorescence intensity of 9EG7 staining ( active  1 integrin ) divided by the mean fluorescence of 9EG7 staining in the presence of MnCl 2 ( total  1 integrin ) . Results were expressed as percentage of activated  1 integrin in CT cells . Measurement of RhoA activation HUVECs were transfected by three rounds of siRNA against ICAP - 1 or CCM1 or CCM2 in the presence or not of  1 integrin siRNA . Confluent cells were then serum starved overnight and RhoG - LISA or Rhotekin pull - down assays ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) were performed as recommended by the manufacturer . Traction force microscopy Traction force microscopy calculations were performed as described previ - ously ( Tseng et al . , 2011 ) . A home - made Fourier transform traction cytometry ( FTTC ) algorithm with zeroth - order regularization computed cellular trac - tion forces from the measured substrate displacements . These are deter - mined from images of fluorescent beads embedded inside the gel network with and without the adherent cell . After correction for experimental drift , fluorescent beads are tracked to obtain a displacement field with high spa - tial resolution . The final displacement field is obtained on a regular grid with 0 . 84 - µm spacing by linear interpolation . Force reconstruction was conducted with the assumption that the substrate is a linear elastic half - space . Traction force microscopy experiments were performed using a microscope ( Ti - E ; Nikon ) equipped with an incubator maintaining the tem - perature at 37°C , mounted with a CCD camera ( CoolSNAP ; Roper Scien - tific ) and driven with microManager ( http : / / www . micro - manager . org ) . Cells were imaged with a Nikon 63× air objective lens ( NA 1 . 4 ) . Micro - beads used for TFM were 200 - nm Dragon Green beads provided by Bangs Laboratories , Inc . JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 560 malformations in mice . J . Clin . Invest . 121 : 1871 – 1881 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI44393 Chang , D . D . , C . Wong , H . Smith , and J . Liu . 1997 . ICAP - 1 , a novel beta1 in - tegrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein , binds to a conserved and functionally important NPXY sequence motif of beta1 integrin . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 1149 – 1157 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 138 . 5 . 1149 Clark , K . , R . Pankov , M . A . Travis , J . A . Askari , A . P . Mould , S . E . Craig , P . Newham , K . M . Yamada , and M . J . Humphries . 2005 . A specific alpha5beta1 - integrin conformation promotes directional integrin translocation and fibronectin ma - trix formation . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 291 – 300 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01623 Clatterbuck , R . E . , C . G . Eberhart , B . J . Crain , and D . Rigamonti . 2001 . Ultrastructural and immunocytochemical evidence that an incompetent blood - brain barrier is related to the pathophysiology of cavernous malformations . J . Neurol . Neurosurg . Psychiatry . 71 : 188 – 192 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1136 / jnnp . 71 . 2 . 188 Colombelli , J . , A . Besser , H . Kress , E . G . Reynaud , P . Girard , E . Caussinus , U . Haselmann , J . V . Small , U . S . Schwarz , and E . H . Stelzer . 2009 . Mechanosensing in actin stress fibers revealed by a close correlation be - tween force and protein localization . J . Cell Sci . 122 : 1665 – 1679 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 042986 Cunningham , K . , Y . Uchida , E . O’Donnell , E . Claudio , W . Li , K . Soneji , H . Wang , Y . S . Mukouyama , and U . Siebenlist . 2011 . Conditional deletion of Ccm2 causes hemorrhage in the adult brain : a mouse model of human cerebral cavernous malformations . Hum . Mol . Genet . 20 : 3198 – 3206 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddr225 DuFort , C . C . , M . J . Paszek , and V . M . Weaver . 2011 . Balancing forces : architec - tural control of mechanotransduction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 : 308 – 319 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3112 Edgell , C . J . , C . C . McDonald , and J . B . Graham . 1983 . Permanent cell line expressing human factor VIII - related antigen established by hybridization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 80 : 3734 – 3737 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 80 . 12 . 3734 Engvall , E . , and E . Ruoslahti . 1977 . Binding of soluble form of fibroblast sur - face protein , fibronectin , to collagen . Int . J . Cancer . 20 : 1 – 5 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ijc . 2910200102 Faurobert , E . , and C . Albiges - Rizo . 2010 . Recent insights into cerebral cavern - ous malformations : a complex jigsaw puzzle under construction . FEBS J . 277 : 1084 – 1096 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2009 . 07537 . x Gaggioli , C . , S . Hooper , C . Hidalgo - Carcedo , R . Grosse , J . F . Marshall , K . Harrington , and E . Sahai . 2007 . Fibroblast - led collective invasion of car - cinoma cells with differing roles for RhoGTPases in leading and following cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 1392 – 1400 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1658 Glading , A . , J . Han , R . A . Stockton , and M . H . Ginsberg . 2007 . KRIT - 1 / CCM1 is a Rap1 effector that regulates endothelial cell cell junctions . J . Cell Biol . 179 : 247 – 254 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200705175 Goetz , J . G . , S . Minguet , I . Navarro - Lérida , J . J . Lazcano , R . Samaniego , E . Calvo , M . Tello , T . Osteso - Ibáñez , T . Pellinen , A . Echarri , et al . 2011 . Biomechanical remodeling of the microenvironment by stromal caveolin - 1 favors tumor invasion and metastasis . Cell . 146 : 148 – 163 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 05 . 040 Guilluy , C . , V . Swaminathan , R . Garcia - Mata , E . T . O’Brien , R . Superfine , and K . Burridge . 2011 . The Rho GEFs LARG and GEF - H1 regulate the me - chanical response to force on integrins . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 722 – 727 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2254 Hilder , T . L . , M . H . Malone , S . Bencharit , J . Colicelli , T . A . Haystead , G . L . Johnson , and C . C . Wu . 2007 . Proteomic identification of the cerebral cavernous malformation signaling complex . J . Proteome Res . 6 : 4343 – 4355 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / pr0704276 Huttenlocher , A . , M . H . Ginsberg , and A . F . Horwitz . 1996 . Modulation of cell mi - gration by integrin - mediated cytoskeletal linkages and ligand - binding affinity . J . Cell Biol . 134 : 1551 – 1562 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 134 . 6 . 1551 Huveneers , S . , and E . H . Danen . 2009 . Adhesion signaling - crosstalk between integrins , Src and Rho . J . Cell Sci . 122 : 1059 – 1069 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 039446 Huveneers , S . , H . Truong , R . Fässler , A . Sonnenberg , and E . H . Danen . 2008 . Binding of soluble fibronectin to integrin alpha5 beta1 - link to focal ad - hesion redistribution and contractile shape . J . Cell Sci . 121 : 2452 – 2462 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 033001 Hynes , R . O . 2002 . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell . 110 : 673 – 687 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00971 - 6 Khan , M . M . , C . Gandhi , N . Chauhan , J . W . Stevens , D . G . Motto , S . R . Lentz , and A . K . Chauhan . 2012 . Alternatively - spliced extra domain A of fibronectin promotes acute inflammation and brain injury after cerebral ischemia in mice . Stroke . 43 : 1376 – 1382 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1161 / STROKEAHA . 111 . 635516 Kleaveland , B . , X . Zheng , J . J . Liu , Y . Blum , J . J . Tung , Z . Zou , S . M . Sweeney , M . Chen , L . Guo , M . M . Lu , et al . 2009 . Regulation of cardiovascular devel - opment and integrity by the heart of glass - cerebral cavernous malformation protein pathway . Nat . Med . 15 : 169 – 176 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nm . 1918 Krishnan , R . , D . D . Klumpers , C . Y . Park , K . Rajendran , X . Trepat , J . van Bezu , V . W . van Hinsbergh , C . V . Carman , J . D . Brain , J . J . Fredberg , et al . 2011 . Submitted : 8 March 2013 Accepted : 2 July 2013 References Abraham , S . , N . Kogata , R . Fässler , and R . H . Adams . 2008 . Integrin beta1 sub - unit controls mural cell adhesion , spreading , and blood vessel wall sta - bility . Circ . Res . 102 : 562 – 570 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1161 / CIRCRESAHA . 107 . 167908 Albigès - Rizo , C . , P . Frachet , and M . R . Block . 1995 . Down regulation of talin alters cell adhesion and the processing of the alpha 5 beta 1 integrin . J . Cell Sci . 108 : 3317 – 3329 . Atienza , J . M . , N . Yu , S . L . Kirstein , B . Xi , X . Wang , X . Xu , and Y . A . Abassi . 2006 . Dynamic and label - free cell - based assays using the real - time cell electronic sensing system . Assay Drug Dev . Technol . 4 : 597 – 607 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1089 / adt . 2006 . 4 . 597 Barkan , D . , and A . F . Chambers . 2011 .  1 - integrin : a potential therapeutic target in the battle against cancer recurrence . Clin . Cancer Res . 17 : 7219 – 7223 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 11 - 0642 Bazzoni , G . , D . T . Shih , C . A . Buck , and M . E . Hemler . 1995 . Monoclonal antibody 9EG7 defines a novel beta 1 integrin epitope induced by sol - uble ligand and manganese , but inhibited by calcium . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 25570 – 25577 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 270 . 30 . 17784 Béraud - Dufour , S . , R . Gautier , C . Albiges - Rizo , P . Chardin , E . Faurobert , and S . Béraud - Dufour . 2007 . Krit 1 interactions with microtubules and mem - branes are regulated by Rap1 and integrin cytoplasmic domain associated protein - 1 . FEBS J . 274 : 5518 – 5532 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2007 . 06068 . x Boettner , B . , and L . Van Aelst . 2009 . Control of cell adhesion dynamics by Rap1 signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 : 684 – 693 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2009 . 06 . 004 Booth , A . J . , S . C . Wood , A . M . Cornett , A . A . Dreffs , G . Lu , A . F . Muro , E . S . White , and D . K . Bishop . 2012 . Recipient - derived EDA fibronectin pro - motes cardiac allograft fibrosis . J . Pathol . 226 : 609 – 618 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / path . 3010 Borikova , A . L . , C . F . Dibble , N . Sciaky , C . M . Welch , A . N . Abell , S . Bencharit , and G . L . Johnson . 2010 . Rho kinase inhibition rescues the endothelial cell cerebral cavernous malformation phenotype . J . Biol . Chem . 285 : 11760 – 11764 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . C109 . 097220 Boulday , G . , A . Blécon , N . Petit , F . Chareyre , L . A . Garcia , M . Niwa - Kawakita , M . Giovannini , and E . Tournier - Lasserve . 2009 . Tissue - specific conditional CCM2 knockout mice establish the essential role of endothelial CCM2 in angiogenesis : implications for human cerebral cavernous malformations . Dis . Model . Mech . 2 : 168 – 177 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dmm . 001263 Boulday , G . , N . Rudini , L . Maddaluno , A . Blécon , M . Arnould , A . Gaudric , F . Chapon , R . H . Adams , E . Dejana , and E . Tournier - Lasserve . 2011 . Developmental timing of CCM2 loss influences cerebral cavernous malformations in mice . J . Exp . Med . 208 : 1835 – 1847 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20110571 Bouvard , D . , L . Vignoud , S . Dupé - Manet , N . Abed , H . N . Fournier , C . Vincent - Monegat , S . F . Retta , R . Fassler , and M . R . Block . 2003 . Disruption of focal adhesions by integrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein - 1 alpha . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 6567 – 6574 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M211258200 Bouvard , D . , A . Millon - Fremillon , S . Dupe - Manet , M . R . Block , and C . Albiges - Rizo . 2006 . Unraveling ICAP - 1 function : toward a new direction ? Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 : 275 – 282 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2005 . 10 . 005 Bouvard , D . , A . Aszodi , G . Kostka , M . R . Block , C . Albigès - Rizo , and R . Fässler . 2007 . Defective osteoblast function in ICAP - 1 - deficient mice . Development . 134 : 2615 – 2625 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 000877 Brunner , M . , A . Millon - Frémillon , G . Chevalier , I . A . Nakchbandi , D . Mosher , M . R . Block , C . Albigès - Rizo , and D . Bouvard . 2011 . Osteoblast mineral - ization requires beta1 integrin / ICAP - 1 - dependent fibronectin deposition . J . Cell Biol . 194 : 307 – 322 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201007108 Brütsch , R . , S . S . Liebler , J . Wüstehube , A . Bartol , S . E . Herberich , M . G . Adam , A . Telzerow , H . G . Augustin , and A . Fischer . 2010 . Integrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein - 1 attenuates sprouting angiogenesis . Circ . Res . 107 : 592 – 601 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1161 / CIRCRESAHA . 110 . 217257 Burute , M . , and M . Thery . 2012 . Spatial segregation between cell - cell and cell - matrix adhesions . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 24 : 628 – 636 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2012 . 07 . 003 Chan , A . C . , D . Y . Li , M . J . Berg , and K . J . Whitehead . 2010 . Recent insights into cerebral cavernous malformations : animal models of CCM and the human phenotype . FEBS J . 277 : 1076 – 1083 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2009 . 07536 . x Chan , A . C . , S . G . Drakos , O . E . Ruiz , A . C . Smith , C . C . Gibson , J . Ling , S . F . Passi , A . N . Stratman , A . Sacharidou , M . P . Revelo , et al . 2011 . Mutations in 2 distinct genetic pathways result in cerebral cavernous 561 Microenvironment remodeling by  1 integrin in CCM • Faurobert et al . Stockton , R . A . , R . Shenkar , I . A . Awad , and M . H . Ginsberg . 2010 . Cerebral cavern - ous malformations proteins inhibit Rho kinase to stabilize vascular integ - rity . J . Exp . Med . 207 : 881 – 896 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20091258 Stratman , A . N . , K . M . Malotte , R . D . Mahan , M . J . Davis , and G . E . Davis . 2009 . Pericyte recruitment during vasculogenic tube assembly stimulates en - dothelial basement membrane matrix formation . Blood . 114 : 5091 – 5101 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2009 - 05 - 222364 Theodossiou , T . A . , C . Thrasivoulou , C . Ekwobi , and D . L . Becker . 2006 . Second harmonic generation confocal microscopy of collagen type I from rat tendon cryosections . Biophys . J . 91 : 4665 – 4677 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 093740 Tomasini - Johansson , B . R . , N . R . Kaufman , M . G . Ensenberger , V . Ozeri , E . Hanski , and D . F . Mosher . 2001 . A 49 - residue peptide from adhesin F1 of Streptococcus pyogenes inhibits fibronectin matrix assembly . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 23430 – 23439 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M103467200 Tseng , Q . , I . Wang , E . Duchemin - Pelletier , A . Azioune , N . Carpi , J . Gao , O . Filhol , M . Piel , M . Théry , and M . Balland . 2011 . A new micropattern - ing method of soft substrates reveals that different tumorigenic signals can promote or reduce cell contraction levels . Lab Chip . 11 : 2231 – 2240 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c0lc00641f Tseng , Q . , E . Duchemin - Pelletier , A . Deshiere , M . Balland , H . Guillou , O . Filhol , and M . Théry . 2012 . Spatial organization of the extracellular ma - trix regulates cell - cell junction positioning . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : 1506 – 1511 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1106377109 Van Obberghen - Schilling , E . , R . P . Tucker , F . Saupe , I . Gasser , B . Cseh , and G . Orend . 2011 . Fibronectin and tenascin - C : accomplices in vascular morphogenesis during development and tumor growth . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 55 : 511 – 525 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1387 / ijdb . 103243eo Velling , T . , J . Risteli , K . Wennerberg , D . F . Mosher , and S . Johansson . 2002 . Polymerization of type I and III collagens is dependent on fibronectin and enhanced by integrins alpha 11beta 1 and alpha 2beta 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 37377 – 37381 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M206286200 Whitehead , K . J . , N . W . Plummer , J . A . Adams , D . A . Marchuk , and D . Y . Li . 2004 . Ccm1 is required for arterial morphogenesis : implications for the etiol - ogy of human cavernous malformations . Development . 131 : 1437 – 1448 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 01036 Whitehead , K . J . , A . C . Chan , S . Navankasattusas , W . Koh , N . R . London , J . Ling , A . H . Mayo , S . G . Drakos , C . A . Jones , W . Zhu , et al . 2009 . The cerebral cavernous malformation signaling pathway promotes vascular integrity via Rho GTPases . Nat . Med . 15 : 177 – 184 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nm . 1911 Wong , J . H . , I . A . Awad , and J . H . Kim . 2000 . Ultrastructural pathological features of cerebrovascular malformations : a preliminary report . Neurosurgery . 46 : 1454 – 1459 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1097 / 00006123 - 200006000 - 00027 Yadla , S . , P . M . Jabbour , R . Shenkar , C . Shi , P . G . Campbell , and I . A . Awad . 2010 . Cerebral cavernous malformations as a disease of vascular perme - ability : from bench to bedside with caution . Neurosurg . Focus . 29 : E4 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3171 / 2010 . 5 . FOCUS10121 Zawistowski , J . S . , I . G . Serebriiskii , M . F . Lee , E . A . Golemis , and D . A . Marchuk . 2002 . KRIT1 association with the integrin - binding protein ICAP - 1 : a new direction in the elucidation of cerebral cavernous malformations ( CCM1 ) pathogenesis . Hum . Mol . Genet . 11 : 389 – 396 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / hmg / 11 . 4 . 389 Zawistowski , J . S . , L . Stalheim , M . T . Uhlik , A . N . Abell , B . B . Ancrile , G . L . Johnson , and D . A . Marchuk . 2005 . CCM1 and CCM2 protein interactions in cell signaling : implications for cerebral cavernous malformations pathogenesis . Hum . Mol . Genet . 14 : 2521 – 2531 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddi256 Zhang , J . , R . E . Clatterbuck , D . Rigamonti , D . D . Chang , and H . C . Dietz . 2001 . Interaction between krit1 and icap1alpha infers perturbation of integ - rin beta1 - mediated angiogenesis in the pathogenesis of cerebral cav - ernous malformation . Hum . Mol . Genet . 10 : 2953 – 2960 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / hmg / 10 . 25 . 2953 Zhang , J . , S . Basu , D . Rigamonti , H . C . Dietz , and R . E . Clatterbuck . 2008 . Krit1 modulates beta 1 - integrin - mediated endothelial cell proliferation . Neurosurgery . 63 : 571 – 578 , discussion : 578 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1227 / 01 . NEU . 0000325255 . 30268 . B0 Zhang , X . A . , and M . E . Hemler . 1999 . Interaction of the integrin beta1 cyto - plasmic domain with ICAP - 1 protein . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 11 – 19 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 274 . 1 . 11 Zhou , X . , R . G . Rowe , N . Hiraoka , J . P . George , D . Wirtz , D . F . Mosher , I . Virtanen , M . A . Chernousov , and S . J . Weiss . 2008 . Fibronectin fibril - logenesis regulates three - dimensional neovessel formation . Genes Dev . 22 : 1231 – 1243 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 1643308 Zovein , A . C . , A . Luque , K . A . Turlo , J . J . Hofmann , K . M . Yee , M . S . Becker , R . Fassler , I . Mellman , T . F . Lane , and M . L . Iruela - Arispe . 2010 . Beta1 integrin establishes endothelial cell polarity and arteriolar lumen forma - tion via a Par3 - dependent mechanism . Dev . Cell . 18 : 39 – 51 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 12 . 006 Substrate stiffening promotes endothelial monolayer disruption through enhanced physical forces . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 300 : C146 – C154 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00195 . 2010 Lampugnani , M . G . , F . Orsenigo , N . Rudini , L . Maddaluno , G . Boulday , F . Chapon , and E . Dejana . 2010 . CCM1 regulates vascular - lumen organiza - tion by inducing endothelial polarity . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 1073 – 1080 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 059329 Larsen , M . , V . V . Artym , J . A . Green , and K . M . Yamada . 2006 . The matrix reorga - nized : extracellular matrix remodeling and integrin signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 : 463 – 471 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2006 . 08 . 009 Lebrin , F . , S . Srun , K . Raymond , S . Martin , S . van den Brink , C . Freitas , C . Breant , T . Mathivet , B . Larrivee , J . - L . Thomas , et al . 2010 . Thalidomide stimulates vessel maturation and reduces epistaxis in individuals with he - reditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia . Nat . Med . 16 : 420 – 428 . Lemmon , C . A . , C . S . Chen , and L . H . Romer . 2009 . Cell traction forces direct fibronectin matrix assembly . Biophys . J . 96 : 729 – 738 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2008 . 10 . 009 Liu , W . , K . M . Draheim , R . Zhang , D . A . Calderwood , and T . J . Boggon . 2013 . Mecha - nism for KRIT1 release of ICAP1 - mediated suppression of integrin activa - tion . Mol . Cell . 49 : 719 – 729 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2012 . 12 . 005 Maruthamuthu , V . , B . Sabass , U . S . Schwarz , and M . L . Gardel . 2011 . Cell - ECM trac - tion force modulates endogenous tension at cell - cell contacts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 108 : 4708 – 4713 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1011123108 McDonald , D . A . , R . Shenkar , C . Shi , R . A . Stockton , A . L . Akers , M . H . Kucherlapati , R . Kucherlapati , J . Brainer , M . H . Ginsberg , I . A . Awad , and D . A . Marchuk . 2011 . A novel mouse model of cerebral cavernous malformations based on the two - hit mutation hypothesis recapitulates the human disease . Hum . Mol . Genet . 20 : 211 – 222 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddq433 McDonald , D . A . , C . Shi , R . Shenkar , R . A . Stockton , F . Liu , M . H . Ginsberg , D . A . Marchuk , and I . A . Awad . 2012 . Fasudil decreases lesion burden in a murine model of cerebral cavernous malformation disease . Stroke . 43 : 571 – 574 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1161 / STROKEAHA . 111 . 625467 Mehta , D . , and A . B . Malik . 2006 . Signaling mechanisms regulating endothelial permeability . Physiol . Rev . 86 : 279 – 367 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00012 . 2005 Mettouchi , A . 2012 . The role of extracellular matrix in vascular branching morphogenesis . Cell Adhes . Migr . 6 : 528 – 534 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4161 / cam . 22862 Millon - Frémillon , A . , D . Bouvard , A . Grichine , S . Manet - Dupé , M . R . Block , C . Albiges - Rizo , A . Millon - Frémillon , and S . Manet - Dupé . 2008 . Cell adaptive response to extracellular matrix density is controlled by ICAP - 1 - dependent beta1 - integrin affinity . J . Cell Biol . 180 : 427 – 441 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200707142 Pagenstecher , A . , S . Stahl , U . Sure , and U . Felbor . 2009 . A two - hit mechanism causes cerebral cavernous malformations : complete inactivation of CCM1 , CCM2 or CCM3 in affected endothelial cells . Hum . Mol . Genet . 18 : 911 – 918 . Papusheva , E . , and C . - P . Heisenberg . 2010 . Spatial organization of adhesion : force - dependent regulation and function in tissue morphogenesis . EMBO J . 29 : 2753 – 2768 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2010 . 182 Parsons , J . T . , A . R . Horwitz , and M . A . Schwartz . 2010 . Cell adhesion : integrat - ing cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 : 633 – 643 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2957 Provenzano , P . P . , D . R . Inman , K . W . Eliceiri , S . M . Trier , and P . J . Keely . 2008 . Contact guidance mediated three - dimensional cell migration is regulated by Rho / ROCK - dependent matrix reorganization . Biophys . J . 95 : 5374 – 5384 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 108 . 133116 Riant , F . , F . Bergametti , X . Ayrignac , G . Boulday , and E . Tournier - Lasserve . 2010 . Recent insights into cerebral cavernous malformations : the molecu - lar genetics of CCM . FEBS J . 277 : 1070 – 1075 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2009 . 07535 . x Rybak , J . - N . , C . Roesli , M . Kaspar , A . Villa , and D . Neri . 2007 . The extra - domain A of fibronectin is a vascular marker of solid tumors and metastases . Cancer Res . 67 : 10948 – 10957 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 07 - 1436 Schwarzbauer , J . E . , and D . W . DeSimone . 2011 . Fibronectins , their fibrillogen - esis , and in vivo functions . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a005041 Singh , P . , C . Carraher , and J . E . Schwarzbauer . 2010 . Assembly of fibronectin extracellular matrix . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 26 : 397 – 419 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 100109 - 104020 Sottile , J . , and D . C . Hocking . 2002 . Fibronectin polymerization regulates the com - position and stability of extracellular matrix fibrils and cell - matrix adhesions . Mol . Biol . Cell . 13 : 3546 – 3559 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 - 01 - 0048 Sottile , J . , F . Shi , I . Rublyevska , H . Y . Chiang , J . Lust , and J . Chandler . 2007 . Fibronectin - dependent collagen I deposition modulates the cell response to fibronectin . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 293 : C1934 – C1946 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00130 . 2007